Vitaly Magidov
VITALY
The MisAdventures of a Ukrainian Orphan


For orphans around the world and the people 
who show them love and care


Copyright
VITALY
The Misadventures of a Ukrainian Orphan
Vitaly Magidov
ALL RIGHTS ARE RESERVED
Copyright © 2021
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise without written permission 
from the publisher. It is illegal to copy this book, post it to a website, or 
distribute it by any other means without permission. The only exception is by 
a reviewer, who may quote short excerpts in a review.
Cover designed by Jake Naylor
Edited by Linda Forrest
This book is a combination of facts about the author’s life and recounts 
events and conversations to the best of the author’s memory. The 
conversations in the book all come from the author’s recollections, though 
they are not written to represent word-for-word transcripts. Rather, the 
author has retold them in a way that evokes the feeling and meaning of what 
was said. While all the stories in this book are true, some dates, places, 
events, names, and identifying details of individuals have been changed, 
invented, and altered for literary effect. The reader should not consider this 
book anything other than a work of literature.
info@vitalybook.com
www.vitalybook.com
Printed in the United States of America
First Printing: Aug 2021
Amazon Kindle, Independent Publishing 
Second Printing: Jan 2022
Amazon Kindle, Independent Publishing
ISBN-9798405565286


Contents
Prologue
iv
I
The Beginning
1
Once Upon a Time
3
2
My First Misadventure
7
3
Lullabies in the Rain
15
4
The Buried Secret
20
5
Childish Love
25
6 Bandits
29
7
Octobrists’ Summer
34
8
Queen of Spades
42
9 Zarnitsa
54
10
Talent Show
66
11
Botsya’s Mother
72
12
Loved Ones Lost
81
13
Chernobyl
87
14
Pan Kotsky
97
15
The Lord’s Prayer
103
16 Too Bloody Curious
111
17
My Dear Mommy
119
18
Surprise Visit
128
19 A New Family
137

II
Foster Care
20
Bazaar Food
147
21
Seconds
154
22
Bra Dag, Sweden!
163
23
Our New Home
174
24
Playing Games
183
25
New Friends
190
26 The Power of Words
199
27
History Lesson
206
28
My Sweet Sixteen
211
29 Christmas Traditions
220
30
Carol of the Bells
228
III
Into Adulthood
31
Much Needed Help
237
32
Family Reunion
241
33
Impossible Dreams
249
34
Vocational School
259
35
My First Job
265
36 Valya’s Greed
270
37
Girls
278
38
New Life and Loss
286
39 The One Who Loved
295
40
University
300
41
Searching for Jesus
307
42
The Evils of Alcohol
316
43
Disappointment
322
44
Broken Families
332
45
Choices
341

351
359
369
46 Beginnings Start with Endings
Epilogue
About the Author


Prologue
I AM A LITTLE BOY, running through the fields as fast as I can. I feel 
myself pursued by some invisible force, as though life itself is chasing 
me. The race to see my dreams come true consumes me. Still, I find 
myself distracted by the beautiful sunflowers along the path, tempting 
me with their promises.
I look back at the field now, trying to see my past, but everything is 
just a cloudy haze.
The beginning of my life was miserable by any standards. I grew up 
in an orphanage with life’s deck stacked against me. Still, I did my best 
to enjoy that life and create success where I could. Whenever I walked 
the streets naively enjoying the day, I always liked to imagine what was 
behind the faces of strangers passing by, trying to read them as I might 
read a book. I enjoyed watching a mother walking the street hand-in-
hand with her child because I knew it was a priceless commodity to 
have. I savored the sight of two brothers hugging each other or two 
lovers holding hands frozen in a moment of endless love. Most of all, 
I held faith in my parents, silently hoping they would come back for 
me.
I sought ways to bear the loneliness around me, but it wasn’t 
easy. Being alone in a crowded place is not the kind of solitude that 
inspires youth. Many of the lonely souls around me—those left by 
parents who should have naturally given the purest unconditional 
affection—believed it was their fault for being rejected or left alone.
When I was young, I also thought some parts of me must change
iv

for others to love me. There were ways I stayed true to myself, but I
also tried to be someone else. There were also people in my life that
said they saw signs of greatness in me, that I was a young budding
star. I wish these signs were as visible to me as they were to them.
Unfortunately, I didn’t see what they saw. I felt cursed by gender
confusion and sexual attraction that was deemed unacceptable. I tried
not to pay attention to what other people thought, but somehow it
mattered. I didn’t know who to be. So I tried to be like those around
me. I tried to conform to the standard, but I was always different,
and I often felt guilty for it. No matter what I did, I felt less than
average—whatever being average was. I wasn’t normal, but I thought
I should be. So, I spent years trying to understand what ‘normal’ was.
Of course, some perspectives of normalcy remained eternal, bred
deep in society’s roots: enjoy your childhood, be good, don’t lie,
respect your parents, go to school, finish school, get a job, start your
own family, retire and savor the rest of your life. Unfortunately for
me, only a minority of the people I knew could live up to that pattern.
So I was left trying to reconcile the contradiction.
I struggled for a long time until I finally questioned the standard
itself. Who decided what was ‘normal’ anyway? The definitions of
‘normal’ are different from person to person. We all have unique
beliefs, religions, views, and attitudes because normal depends on
individual experiences. Having differences is what makes us normal.
We are all human. So many of our experiences are the same, but we
are different from one another too. If only we could find a way to come
together and get along with each other, we could see that it is easy to
take what we have for granted, to forget we had a childhood spent with
doting parents, or that we had opportunities in our lives that others
didn’t. We may even fail to care about the people who cared for us,
regardless of their circumstances, or that even though we might have
once felt wrapped up in misery, our lives eventually found love.
v

When we accept the complete picture of who we are, we can learn to
appreciate times of sorrow because we will remember to recognize joy
when it strikes us, and it will. I discovered that life is more than just
white and black. It is a spectrum full of color, vibrant and versatile for
those not bound by the chains of solely striving toward materialistic
gains, forgetting about the most valuable and unavailable purchases.
I waslonely as a little boy, but I also understood mylife had a purpose.
I didn’t know the steps I would take to achieve my goals, but I knew I
was still alive because I kept moving forward. As long as I was working
toward my dreams, I was truly living.
I didn’t want to forget about the things that mattered. So, I spent my
life searching through books, songs, movies, experiences, and childish
experiments, exploring different belief systems and religions in an
attempt to unravel the meaning behind my pain and loneliness. In
the end, I learned and wish to remind everyone who may be doubting;
regardless of the number of days we have in front of us; family, love,
and acceptance are the things we all need. I always felt that little in
life is more valuable than a simple hug or word of consolation. Even
with a million other materialistic values around us, happiness cannot
be everlasting without others’ love and attention.
I have often wondered how it would be if everyone put their stories
on paper, making their lives eternal for others to feel their successes
and learn from their mistakes. If we learn from the world’s history,
why can’t we also learn from people’s individual stories? Perhaps we
would discover that being normal is just one of the ideas we don’t need
and that judging has no place in any conversation, regardless of how
pleasant our surroundings may be.
Now, I seldom reflect upon my history, not because I fear it might
haunt me, but because it does not tell me where I am going. Our
histories do not tell us who we are. We make ourselves by our choices.
I chose not to let the unfortunate circumstances of my past define me.
vi

I did not make peace with what life gave me. Instead, I was inspired
to go further, beyond that unbearable state. Overcoming that history,
tearing it down, and denying it, I learned to go beyond it. Making
goals and striving to achieve them made my life worth living. Studying
anything new was the only thing that brought me joy. Finding a way
to be better, go further, learn, and later teach others who were willing
to learn—that was my way out.
Besides sharing my life experiences, I decided that writing my
‘Misadventures’ would be an excellent way to draw parallels within
cultures and religions. I think we all benefit when we find common
ground between us.
The best we can do in life is to make every
experience count and maybe even help someone else while we do it.
I am not writing to be accepted, nor am I writing to be understood. I
am writing to share and show that every life counts, no matter how
lonely it may feel. Going back, dreaming, remembering, and recalling,
I put my experiences on paper, reviving every moment, breaking loose,
telling another story, and ultimately sharing the unique experiences
of someone who counts… me.
vii



I
The Beginning
Life is Beautiful! Enjoy every moment of it! Share it with
your friends! Focus on the things you have in life and not
what you lack!
—Vitaly Magidov


1
Once Upon a Time
Sign at the entrance to Chernivtsi written in Cyrilicc - Ukrainian
T
HE BEGINNING OF NOVEMBER 1979 reflected the air of
Communist Russia. It was almost always raining, and the
weather influenced my little town of Chernivtsi. On most
3

VITALY
days, you could only see the bleak gray sky pouring its tears upon
the face of the small Ukrainian city. Still, the sun’s brightness would
sometimes penetrate the clouds and make its way down to earth. The
people could feel more than see the light because the sun didn’t just
pierce the clouds. It also penetrated the windows and the hearts of the
people behind them.
Communism dictated its rules to the faithful people of Ukraine then.
Still, so gracious were those times when you could buy ice cream for
twenty Russian kopeks, or what would be two cents in America today.
It was a time when people had respect for each other, and nobody
swore or had the thoughts of hurting their neighbor when everybody
felt as though they were free, but they weren’t, not really. The shadow
of socialism still covered their hearts.
Not far from the center of the town lay a petite woman of thirty-
eight. She had blond hair, dark brown eyes, and tiny wrinkles that
unfairly aged her face. The clouds hung heavy outside her hospital
window, spreading as much gloom over her as they did the rest of the
town. The first days of November were the worst for her. She was sure
she couldn’t go on, and she still had to carry the child for who knew
how many more days.
Some might argue that the alcohol she consumed every day caused
her trouble. It was killing her, but it also saved her. It killed her pain
and gave her the strength to endure her suffering. She still had a lot
of power. She knew how to fight and win battles, which helped her
survive. She knew alcohol might damage the life growing inside her
but didn’t care. Without her daily dose, there was too much pain. So,
she drank. As much as she could, she drank.
She was selfish. There is no doubting that. She would not concern
herself with how to get money for food or clothes to wear. She would
not think of serving others or how to care for the child she carried.
Her only concern was surviving the pain of that day. She would drink,
4

ONCE UPON A TIME
and she would count the minutes until the blessed moment finally
arrived—a moment most would still count as the miracle of life. For
her, it would be the glorious gift of her freedom.
Peace Hospital silently whisperedinto the ears of its patients, “sleep,
sleep,” until the only sound you could hear was the drip of a faucet in
the far hall bathroom. Six hours of peaceful bliss were still drifting
aimlessly through the corridors when screams suddenly pierced the
stillness, bursting with fluorescent light from a single room to flood
the otherwise darkened hall. The screams drowned out the doctor and
nurses, who were doing everything they could to give this child its
very best chance at survival.
The mother lay crying and screaming, begging the doctor for just
one drink, “just a little something for the pain…please?!?!”
The doctor ignored her cries, dismissing her sickness to think only
of the child.
The nurses responded, begging her, “Please, remain calm. For the
sake of your baby.”
Her cries continued over their words. She didn’t care. She couldn’t
think of anyone or anything. Her pain was too great. So it was left
to the valiant effort of the doctor, nurses, and their overwhelming
patience to bring this sweet new life into the world.
“What will you call him?” the nurse asked the exhausted mother as
they reached to her with a swaddled baby boy in their arms.
After a moment of deafening silence, she accepted the child, an-
swering, “Vitaly.”
I was four kilograms when I was born, and as my name suggests, I
was full of life. Though I began on an artificial respirator and didn’t
grow as fast as the other babies, I gave life everything I had from the
very start.
They didn’t expect much from me, saying I had some kind of
dysfunction in my “Psycho System,” but even then, before I was
5

VITALY
conscious enough to know, I was determined to succeed. I started
to walk when I was almost two and had already made tremendous
developmental improvements by the time I was three. Life seemed to
stack the deck against me, but I was determined to overcome the odds.
I wouldn’t quit. Maybe I was like my mother that way.
Maybe I learned my courage from the woman that gave me life, but
that is all she gave. She walked out of the hospital without me that
day. She left, and I stayed with the doctors and nurses until I was a
toddler, old enough to attend the young children’s home withthe other
orphans. When I moved to the Detski Dom, or what you might think
of as preschool, it was amazing to see so many children there. The
hospital nurseries were small. As an adult, I learned that there were
over twenty thousand young children in the USSR at that time who
did not have parents willing or able to care for them. Those children,
like me, lived in children’s homes until they were old enough to go to
an orphanage.
I was one of about eighty children, thrust into a world where we
all needed love. Each of us was different, but with many stories that
were the same, getting all we could from just a handful of educators.
It seemed we were left to begin our lives with a disadvantage. Still, we
all had our chance. In the end, it is what you do when you don’t have
the advantage that counts.
6

2
My First Misadventure
Chernivtsi Orphanage on Fastivska Street where I grew up.
S
URROUNDED BY THE MAGNIFICENT crown of the Carpathian
mountains, Chernivtsi sat atop fertile soil on the upper
course of the river Prut. As the cultural, educational, and
architectural hub of Ukraine, the city suffered continued attacks by
7

VITALY
warriors and influxes of refugees as the currents of many nations
altered its destiny. Every new conquest changed its history, and its
people as various rulers selflessly adapted it to fit their benefit or
belief.
A heavy stream of conquerors ravaged the town, but I didn’t see
scars carved into the cobblestone streets. I saw something more. I
loved wandering and wondering who else had passed along the roads
I walked. I imagined that those feet were still there, traveling with
me, only caught up in another realm, repeating history by trying to
fix what is wrong and preserve what is right.
The city is a better place now. It is slowly blooming, finding its way
to survive and be free. Some of those currents of the past have stopped,
disappeared, or maybe we just forgot them behind the unusual peace
empty battlefields left in their place. Chernivtsi was one of those
war-torn places that seemed to hold a composure only occasionally
disturbed by its chilly wind.
Wherever I have traveled in my life, I have always longed to return
and see the sign outside the city entrance, saying “Chernivtsi,” but it
wasn’t always like that, not when I was a boy.
I once heard that Chernivtsi owes its name to the black color of the
city walls, built from dark oak layered with its black-colored soil. Like
something birthed from the soul of the land itself, a building with
the same kind of stoic composure stood on the outermost edge of the
town. Surrounded by shy crowns of flowers planted carefully by the
little hands of its residents, the Orphanage on Fastivska Street reached
toward the fading light of another day. As they worked with discipline
cut deep into their thoughts, anyone passing by could hear their voices
chanting:
Ravlik Pavlik, vysun rozhki,
Dam tebe kusok kartoshkii
8

MY FIRST MISADVENTURE
Esli budet malo, dam kusochek sala
Ravlik Pavlik, show your antenna,
If you do, I will give you a piece of potato
If it is not enough, I will give you a piece of fat
My voice stood out from the rest, singing to the snails, hoping to see
their antennas. With every rainstorm, they came out, and I joined
them. I removed my shoes and thought my shirt was too much to wear.
I longed for the awakening touch of moisture falling from the sky,
wondering how many other faces it bathed with its crisp refreshment.
Rain was one of the things I enjoyed the most. I loved playing or
watching television in the playroom I shared with dozens of other
curious orphans, but sometimes there were too many children trying
too hard to be happy. The rain was something I could enjoy alone.
I was like everyone else on sunny days, trying to squeeze every bit
of happiness I could from my environment. No matter how innocent
the games, I enjoyed pushing limits and finding ways to test my wit
and strength. Our playground was old and well used, but I thought it
was magnificent. A steel rocket built for climbing stood glorious next
to swings, merry-go-rounds, and teeter-totters. The missile called
to me, daring me to abandon my contemplation of the flowing clouds
and accept its challenge.
In a few seconds, I was at the top, with my head held high. Taking a
deep breath, I puffed out my chest and stood bathed in pride. I reached
to touch the sky withone of my hands, but I wascut short. The sound of
my friends’ voices cut through the rays of sunshinethat were selflessly
spotlighting my accomplishment.
“Quick, the headmaster is coming!”
Their words released the restless bird waiting in my chest. I felt it
flutter and come to life as I saw the headmaster coming toward me.
9

VITALY
Then, as if struck with a brick on my head, I reacted. I swallowed the
bitter lump growing in my throat and rushed to find a way down from
the rocket.
Looking up again, I saw my friends running away from sure deten-
tion, but I would not be so lucky. I suddenly slipped and fell to the
ground. Uncomfortable warmth rushed through my head, melting
the frozen soil beneath me. The earthy smell of dirt and grass joined
with the severe vibration of pain, reminding me of bones I seldom
considered, bones that were still intact just minutes ago. The warmth
I first felt in my head now burst from my wrist, stretching the skin
tight as it swelled. Finally, as all these sensations gathered into a single
devastating moment, my face twitched in pain, and an uncontrolled
scream escaped my lips.
“For God’s sake, Vitaly, what were you thinking, climbing up that
high?!” The headmaster’s voice was a perplexing blend of anger and
compassion as he helped me stand. Though he took me by the arm
that wasn’t injured, I could feel the bones in my wrist trembling in
pain and distress. I wanted to cry, but I kept the tears in the corners of
my eyes. As we entered the building, we passed my friends all huddled
together. I could see them wanting to renounce the guilt of running
and bury it deep by their silence. They tried to appear as excluded from
the story as my arm was from my body.
The headmaster Vasyl Ivanovych took me to the recovery room we
liked to call ‘the isolator.’ That day, it wasn’t a lonely place. Instead,
it was full of people who wanted to discover what had happened. The
pulsing, hot pain that echoed in my ears like a drumbeat joined their
worried voices—making my head spin.
The trauma of the moment, or maybe the pain and hospital-like
environment, took me back to growing up in the Peace Hospital
nursery, a baby boy, forgotten by his mother. Her name was Evheniya
Mikitivna, and she began her life in Russia on a bitinglycold day in 1941.
10

MY FIRST MISADVENTURE
Born with her, Chernivsti witnessed the birth of a second world war.
Tanks rumbled down narrow city streets, drowning out the sounds of
her first cries, wiping out her hopes and dreams with them.
I was born thirty-eight years later, in a small hospital painted with
the same gray carelessness as the war. I liked to imagine my birthday
as a magical day with pleasant expectations hanging above Chernivtsi.
Still, I suppose I wasjustanother drop in the sea of humanity,one more
soul to explore, love, and suffer, just another crier echoing through
the hospital halls hoping to make history.
My mother later told me that I left her womb minutes after a shot
of vodka ran through her bloodstream. Neutralizing her pain with
alcohol was a deeply established habit. Its roots wrapped around her
damaged liver and into the cord that held us together for nine months.
I suppose we were never closer than we were at that time. My birth
severed that connection, and after a hearty scream, I was breathing
the world’s air. I did not have the rumbling tanks to overwhelm the
sound of my sorrow, but I began my journey crying nonetheless.
The last thing my mother did for me before she left was to name
me ‘Vitaly,’—with the accent on “a,” rather than the “i.” Though
people often mispronounce it, the meaning is unmistakable. Vitaly
means “life” or “the one with a desire to live,” and I suppose that my
name was, in fact, my destiny. It allowed me to find beauty in even
the ugliest of experiences.
I don’t think I consciously remembered my beginnings, but I dreamt
of whatI wantedthem to be. But it wasn’tnight, and I wasn’tdreaming.
This time trauma enveloped me as I slipped in and out of memories,
travelingback and forth betweenthe pain of my origins and the searing
agony in my wrist.
“Vitaly…. Vitaly…. Vitaly!” a faint voice called my name from what
seemed to be miles away.
My dreamless sleep was interrupted, and I tried to open eyelids that
11

VITALY
felt heavier than rocks. A silhouette was gently leaning over my body,
trying to rouse me from a memory that felt too real to leave.
As the morning sun worked its way through the windows, a golden
glow wrappeditself around the silhouette, bathing the angel in a nearly
divine halo. A hoarse whisper escaped me, “Mom?”
“Vitaly. Wake up, Vitaly,” the clarifying nature of the chilly morning
air overtook the warmthof the vision as I recognized the chestnut curls
of Tamara Petrivna, a strict but thoughtful teacher at the orphanage.
I was glad to see my instructor but also worried about her judgmental
reaction. The fear of punishment overtook the dreams of a childhood
I never had, chasing the final remnants of who my mother might have
been from my mind. Finally, I came back into the moment and the
overwhelming pain of my broken wrist.
She saw I was awake, and her fear exploded, becoming the only life
in the room. “What did you do to yourself?” she asked, not posing the
question to me as much as she was to some elusive power that might
one day control my adventurous spirit.
Although I heard her question, I was overwhelmed with the feeling
that every answer I could give would be inappropriate or wrong. So
I froze like a captured animal, decided not to blink or move, keeping
my voice lodged somewhere between my brain and vocal cords.
“What were you thinking? Why would you climb that high, and then
of all things, jump from that God-forsaken piece of steel?” She walked
in circles in front of my bed, with her eyes nailed to the well-scrubbed
floor: She was angry, but I also noticed the worry in her eyes and that
her voice occasionally cracked beneath the bitterness and fright.
“You could have gotten out with more than just your arm broken…
do you know that? What if you….?” She stopped suddenly, unable to
continue. Sighing, she took a moment, looking at the freshly plastered
cast binding my wrist. She then continued decisively, “What would
we do if you ended up with a broken back or legs? Did you think about
12

MY FIRST MISADVENTURE
that?” I could hear her vocal cords tightening as she fought to control
her tears.
After a moment, she continued in an even controlled tone, one
painfully void of emotion. For a moment, when she was so upset,
she seemed to see me as a mother might see her child. Concern
overcame her, but she stifled her affection. She was back again, a
teacher speaking to a wayward student. “There is someone outside
who would like to see you. I will leave you two alone for a while.”
Before she finished saying the words, I knew who it would be. She
was talking about Igor, the only other person I could understand
without a single word spoken. He entered the room, looking around to
gather all of the information he could. Today was his first time seeing
the isolator. It wasn’t mine.
Tamara Petrivna looked at him, “Please, try not to stay longer than
half an hour. Breakfast is about to start.” Then, she turned to cast a
final glance at me and left the room.
“Hey, Vitaly!” I could hear the guilt nearly burst from him as he
nestled himself at the bottom of my wrinkled bedding. “They told me
I was supposed to ask you how you feel, but I bet you feel horrible. I’m
sorry for not being there.”
I suddenly remembered that he wasn’t at the playground when I
fell from the rocket. I was unable to hide the smile this stirred. I was
glad he wasn’t one of the deserters who ran to protect themselves and
not me. Igor was always there for me. We had a special connection,
something more than I had with anyone else in the world. We were
linked together like we had known each other all our lives.
I tried to stop his guilt, “You don’t need to be sorry. You weren’t
even there, which is good. Everyone else ran away when they saw
the headmaster coming.” I was mad. They didn’t even care if I was
okay, but my curiosity about Igor overtook my worry, “Where were
you anyway?”
13

VITALY
“I was in the garden, making dens,” he said, dropping his head to
hide the shame drawn on his face.
I started laughing uncontrollably. “Dens?!?! That sounds cool,”
His laughter soon joined mine, and I knew things would be okay
again. “We’ll make more dens together when I get out of here. Deal?”
He nodded, “Deal.”
We sat silently for a moment as kids sometimes do, waiting for
the next thing to say. Before we could come to it, a teacher entered,
carrying a breakfast tray. The food at the orphanage wasn’t always
good, but judging by the growling sound in my stomach, I guessed
that anything would taste delicious to me today.
Igor jumped from the bed, looking over the incoming tray, trying to
discover what we were having for breakfast. From the look in his eyes,
I could see he was hungry too.
He headed toward the door to find some food of his own, but he
stopped and turned at the last moment, almost to confirm I would be
okay. Then he smiled and said, “See you, Vitaly.”
I smiled back. That was all I needed, a smile from Igor and whether
I ended up in detention or not; I also knew I would be alright.
14

3
Lullabies in the Rain
Kids at the Summer Camp with our Instructor in the front.
I am way on the back corner at the top on the left, hiding.
A
FTER THREE DAYS IN THE ISOLATOR, I returned to my
routine, which meant spending more time with Igor and
my other friends. However, it also indicated I must return
15

VITALY
to my chores. I had an endless list of duties, one of which was hand
washing my clothes. It was painful with an injury. I can still feel the
sting of when the clothes got heavy, all soaked in water and soap. Igor
tried to help me, but he also had his clothes to wash, and I didn’t want
him to get a double round of laundry. So, I pretended not to recognize
his attention and worked quickly.
After finishing the laundry, it was time to take a shower. Holding
soap was a challenge, but I forgot about the pain as I knew there were
rays of sunshine outside my window, inviting me into the open air
for a playful afternoon with my friends. I smiled with anticipation as
the laughter and screaming of children playing catch, swinging, and
enjoying the teeter-totter broke the silence on Fastivska Street.
I would soon be dressed and with them again, deeply involved in
games, too busy to notice what anyone else was doing. I loved that
time when play was the only chore left on my long list of things to
do, but I still found myself distracted, repeatedly glancing at the gate,
expecting someone, anyone, to appear and take me home with them. I
liked to imagine that someone passing by our building would find the
playful screaming enjoyable and decide to enter the world of orphans
looking for a child to love. They rarely did. They continued with
their lives, not willing to admit the presence of the children they were
leaving behind. Still, I dreamed that all of us would have a home of
our own one day and that every one of my friends would forget what
it meant to be parentless.
As I made my way to the playground, Igor was already waiting for
me. I went straight to him, speaking in a mischievous whisper, “How
about we start digging?”
He smiled and followed me to the garden. I scrutinized the trees
behind us, hoping no one would see us leave, but the only thing
following us were more screams and laughter of children lost in their
adventures. Finally, we were safe to begin our next experiment.
16

LULLABIES IN THE RAIN
Leaves covered the ground in the small orchard nestled next to an
empty side of the orphanage. Not many children played here as there
was nothing but the earth and the garden to entertain them. Enjoying
the quiet of nature was something both Igor and I loved. So we could
often find places like this where it was just the two of us and everything
nature had to offer.
Over the last year, the teachers at the orphanage had guided us
through each step of the flower’s journey, beginning with the seed.
We learned to collect their pistils in the fall and replant them. In spring,
we pruned and nurtured the garden’s growth by cleaning out the weeds
and watering them with buckets of water from the orphanage building.
We stood now, surrounded by the earthy fragrance of the garden we
had planted. Inhaling the scene around us was sweet and gratifying.
The fallen leaves danced with the mild aroma of the flowers, making
every one of my senses come to life.
I walked up to lean on a tree, taking a spot I thought was perfect for
our work. Igor was crouched in the shadows of the building, bent in
search of something. As he came into the light again, I saw he was
clumsily carrying scrapped objects he had found. They looked like
chunks of brick that had fallen from the orphanage walls and turned
out to be perfectly acceptable substitutes for shovels when we started
digging the hole for our den.
We were only halfwaythrough makingour perfect hiding place when
I began to feel random drops of rain land on my forehead. I ignored
them, wanting to finish the project we started. As the drops began to
multiply, I felt them tangle in my eyebrows before gathering to rest in
the corners of my eyes, but I kept digging.
“Do we stop now?” Igor asked.
“No,” I laughed, “We just dig faster until the rain starts pouring.”
We continued digging, and when Igor thought the den was ready, he
jumped in to see if both of us could fit. Igor wasn’t as small as I was,
17

VITALY
but it was perfect. So, we started gathering the already damp leaves,
and after we collected a proper pile, we found branches to lay across
the top of the hole. After blanketing the sticks with the leaves, we
hid inside. Rain drummed atop the stockpile, creating a melody that
reminded me of someone I knew. That sound was the closest thing to
a lullaby I had heard in a very long time. It took me back to the times
when I was too small to sing to myself, a time when nurses probably
cradled me, giving me as much motherly love as they had to offer. I
didn’t know how young I was when my mother abandoned me. So, I
closed my eyes and pretended she was there, singing to me through
the rain.
The warmth of Igor’s body made my imaginings as tangible as they
could be, and his silence made me think that maybe he was also trying
to recall his mother’s voice. We lay together quietly, allowing the rain
to be our substitute for the comforting sound of a mother’s loving
song. I let the memory of a beautifulwomanblind me as if this moment
was a piece of heaven. I felt it like the sun and the sky, the warm air
I was breathing, the earth beneath us, and the bed where I usually
slept, cuddling my pillow. I could almost hear her humming a divine
melody I had never heard before, making me dizzily intoxicated with
the feeling of unconditional love. I lay there knowing that even if the
sky fell today, I would be safe, sound, and sleeping peacefully.
After what felt like an eternity spent wrapped in my pleasant trance,
I was awakened by Igor’s voice telling me that we needed to go. The
rain had stopped. Still, the lullaby was playing in my head, mystifying
my thoughts with imagined memories of my mother. I tried to hold
onto every impression of her, modifying, recreating, and beautifying
everything I knew about her. I rewrote the stories I heard, putting her
on a throne made of unconditional devotion.
Only later, as I grew, would I see the real woman who was likely
lying in the rain-drenched streets, buried in the oblivion of alcohol.
18

LULLABIES IN THE RAIN
Nevertheless, until that time came, I had a world where I made her
mine and where I was hers and where we loved each other. When I
wasn’t eating, working, or going to school, I spent most days with my
head wrapped in a dreamy mist of wishes, hopes, and expectations.
Every day I dreamed of falling asleep in her arms, our limbs crossed in
one warmunbreakable hug. I held hope until the very last second when
they would lock the doors against another day where she didn’t come,
and I would go to bed, clinging to a pillow wet with tears, pretending
it was the giant stuffed bear I always hoped she’d give me.
It was late as we rushed into the building. Tamara Petrivna was
already trying to chase the other children into their beds, threatening
to call the headmaster if they didn’t listen. So, she didn’t notice when
we came in later than everyone else, still covered in the dirt of our
hiding place. I snuck past her, watching her threats successfully work
on some of my friends. I never responded well to force, but I knew she
was trying her best, so I decided to oblige and head to bed.
Tiny needles coursed through my body, injecting exhaustion into my
head and making my eyelids heavy. As I undressed, I was unusually
silent, trying to ignore the voices of boys colliding around me and
hold tight to the memory of the rain lullaby instead. Mesmerized by
thoughts of my pillow and my only other chance to hug and be hugged,
I wished I was already out of my wet clothes and drowning my face in
the warm comfort of sleep.
As I climbed into bed, clamoring for the same comfort I felt only
moments ago in the den, I pulled the blanket over my head and lay on
my belly. I was almost entirely covering my pillow—the only thing
that separated me from the hard mattress beneath me. Memories of
Igor’s company clouded the cravings of my dreams as thoughts of my
mother faded from my mind, temporarily replaced by the feeling of
genuine warmth and safety that only exists when one person touches
another.
19

4
The Buried Secret
My brother Slavik on the very left and sister Nadya at the front right
playing in the sand.
I
DIDN’T REALIZE THAT MY EYES had closed when I first saw
the beautiful woman. I could see she was the kind of woman
who knew how to make you feel cherished and loved. In the
20

THE BURIED SECRET
dream, she was looking at two little boys. One of them wrapped his
arms around her, clinging to her love. The boy’s skin was blonde and
freckled, illuminated by sunlight trying to break through the glass
doors that rested behind the woman’s eyes.
The woman’s skin was as dark as night, holding stars in her chest
and showing a thousand moons in her stiff smile. I could see the
muscles around her lips trembling as she worked to control the facade
of artificial kindness. From behind the woman’s eyes, the clinging
boy tried to wave, but he was trapped by her as if she was trying to
keep him only to herself.
The other boy returned my gaze with lips turned up in a silent grin,
glowing like a saint born to rescue the young child. He then took the
younger boy’s hand and led him from the room, passing through the
glass doors. I tried to see where they were going. It was like a portal
to another world where a vibrantly green field existed in anticipation
of a visit.
The woman watched them. Then, she looked through me, a stiff
smile still hanging from the corner of her flawlesslyshaped lips. There
was no wind. Still, her hair danced, catching bits of sunlight, twisting
and waving like a mermaid caught in a raging sea.
I opened my eyes to the endless warmth of my pillow, wanting to
bathe myself in the saintly comfort of my dream. I wanted to be
in the lush green field, far away from the gray torment of another
day at the orphanage, especially this day. But, unfortunately, it was
Subotnik—Saturday, which meant there would be even more things
to do before I could get back to making dens with Igor.
Shaking the last of the vision still hanging from my eyelashes, I got
up, put on clothes, and bolted from the room. I was eager to complete
my chores, not just because I wanted to dig with Igor, but because
getting busy meant my day would pass quickly. Sunday was knocking
at my door with nervous euphoria, and my bones felt as though they
21

VITALY
were nothing but air. Sundays were the only days I got to have ice
cream—one of the best things in life.
Ice cream and our weekly trip to the cinema were the best things
we had at the orphanage.
There was nothing better to me than
the moments when big-screen pictures collided with sweet frozen
delights. So, naturally, I rushed right to Tamara Petrivna on Saturday,
asking what we needed to do.
As I approached her, she was yelling something about a hole in the
ground. The words squeezed past a jaw so tight they made little sense.
Her angrily pressed teeth stuck out from her jaw as if she might bite
someone. She wasn’t just angry about a hole being there. Given that
the culprits covered the shelter with fallen leaves, she thought that
someone made it as a trap. She never suspected the ditch might be a
drum for the rain to play or a sanctuary for the lost.
I stood back, putting on a face that wouldn’t expose my guilt, and
allowed her to pump out her rage. I tried to escape the fact that Igor
and I were the “bandits” she was rebuking and tried not to laugh when
I heard the devious plans she imagined were behind our adventure. I
stifled my smile and tried to think of something to make things right.
Inhaling air filled with my teacher’s screams, I erupted, “I will fix
it!” The words burst forth from my mouth before I could stop them.
I waited for her to continue showering screams, but instead, she just
stared at me. It felt like an eternity before she snapped coldly, “Very
well! You will find a shovel in the garage.”
As suddenly as the onslaught had begun, it ended. All that remained
was the brisk click of her shoes traveling down an otherwise silent
hall.
Knowing exactly where the shovel was, I took off to find it. I didn’t
want to bury the den, but I had no choice if I wanted my Sunday
treasures. Doing something wrong would mean being grounded,
which in turn promised that I wouldn’t be able to go to the cinema or
22

THE BURIED SECRET
have ice cream with the rest of the group.
I raced to the small structure behind the main building.
Like
most garages, ours mainly served for storing tools and old things
no one needed. It was an undeniable grave of discarded treasures. I
searched for the shovel—displaced from its usual spot by the garage
doors—when I unexpectedly stumbled upon a pleasant reward. A
small relay engine was sitting by a pile of unwanted aluminum scraps.
I moved to the doors, looking to see if anyone was near, then came
back in to take the leftovers.
My mind flooded with endless ideas of what I could craft out of the
remains I found as I rushed across the backyard, focused on a new use
for the den Igor and I created. My heart pounded under the gold mine
I carried against my chest. Terrified of being caught, I gently set the
scraps in the pit. Then, I covered the treasure with the same leaves we
used to bury ourselves beneath the rain.
Returning to the garage, I searched for the shovel, desperately
looking to find it before anyone discovered my cache. Eventually,
my eyes landed upon it, and relief swelled in my chest. I rushed back
to the den, manically scraping dirt from around the hole, to hide my
latest prize.
My head swam with ideas and expectations. Making toys was one of
my favorite things, but we didn’t have much to use. Between classes,
writing lessons, meals, and Sunday movies, we didn’t have many
things to occupy our minds at the orphanage. So, we often visited the
junkyard behind our school to find bounty we could use to make new
playthings. Our instructors taught us how to sew, knit, and develop
our creativity by learning handy activities to help us as adults, but
those things weren’t the same. They weren’t for fun. They were for
survival. I can still hear Tamara Petrivna’s words to this day, “If I
have a hole to patch, there will be no one to mend it for you. You will
need to do it yourself.” I think that’s true for a lot more than sewing.
23

VITALY
I often took the things I learned to another level. I would knit clothes
for my toys. I also did cross stitch and liked to draw the cartoons I
found in wrappers from the bubble gum people would sometimes
bring to the orphanage. I found ways to fill the empty times of day,
but of all the things I learned to do, those I enjoyed most had to do
with electricity. There was something immensely satisfying for me
in seeing my creations serve a purpose. When I found the engine,
big plans began forming in my mind. I imagined creating something
extraordinary from what others thought were scraps.
As I shoveled, I prayed that no one would notice the junk’sdisappear-
ance, at least not before Sunday had arrived. I took my time making
sure I concealed the den, making it appear as if it never existed. By the
time I finished, all that remained was freshly tilled soil, and I knew
that would dry, blending to match the rest of the dirt. I scattered leaves
across the area, mimicking nature as much as possible. In a day or
two, no one would imagine it was a place with buried treasure.
I hid it so perfectly, the thought of forgetting the place myself
planted a seed of fear in my chest. So, I took a couple of twigs and dug
them deep into the ground, leaving only tips to reach for the sky. Then,
I stood up and gazed at my handiwork. As I returned to the garage
to leave the shovel where it belonged, I thought of how pleased I was
with my ingenuity. Two little twigs, invisible to anyone but me, stood
guard for me until the day I could come back and reclaim my prize.
24

5
Childish Love
Children ready to enjoy Summer Camp. Notice the rocket in the back.
Just the kind of thing I couldn’t wait to climb.
W
HEN I RETURNED TO THE ORPHANAGE, it was pulsing
with dozens of innocent bodies, each consumed by its
current endeavor.
Some were sweeping the floor or
dusting while others scrubbed common areas. I could tell Subotnik
25

VITALY
had begun, and I was already waiting for it to end.
Weekdays were already busy for us. Every day, we would wake up
and make our beds. Then, we would wash our faces and dress in
preparation for our lessons. Our classes began right after breakfast
and continued until lunch. After lunch, we had an hour of playing
sports and a nap followed by a small snack of milk and cookies or
sometimes pie. We would then do homework until dinner. At the
end of our busy day, we watched television until it was time again to
prepare for sleep. It felt like every day was a long day of exhausting
chores and endless lists of things to do, but with our extra duties on
Saturday, the sunlight bled out long before we would have time to do
anything but clean.
This particular Saturday, I couldn’t stop thinking about the night-
time journey of the sun. I couldn’t wait for it to rise again and shine
its light on my long-expected Sunday. So, the moment I finished my
chores, I rushed past the friendly conversations and back to my pillow.
Warm notes of red and purple colored the clouds as I stowed the mop
and rags and prepared to put another Subotnik behind me.
The other children like to stay up a little longer to talk and play. So,
I knew our room would be full of coveted silence. I could fall asleep
quickly when it was quiet. So, I rushed to change and climb into bed,
but I soon realized I wasn’t alone. I noticed the shape of a body lying
on my bed, all curled up and trembling quietly.
I approached slowly, wondering who it might be, already believing I
knew who it was. Then I saw Igor’s head, caressed by the fading light
coming through the window. I stopped for a moment. I didn’t know
what to do. Igor was bigger and stronger than most of us, but tonight
he looked small. Still, I understood his pain and inevitably compared
it to my own. Emotions buzzed in my head, hysterically bumping into
one another as I approached him and laid my hand on one of his arms.
He recoiled with a wet and silent cry and began rocking back and
26

CHILDISH LOVE
forth, resembling the rhythmic beat of the rain lullaby that comforted
us in the den. I stood back, moving to the other side of my bed. I didn’t
know how to help him. I just wanted to be asleep already, calling to the
dreams hanging above my pillow, but I recognized his sorrow. I was
drawn to it, almost feeling obligated to make it disappear and frighten
it into never coming back again.
Eventually, my instinct took over, and I returned to the bed to lay
beside his twitching body. I carefully wrapped my arm around him,
silently consoling him, feeling every tear as if it was my face they
saturated. I held him until his trembling faded. He relaxed a little,
but he wouldn’t look into my eyes. Maybe he was like me, fearing
loneliness, trusting another person to see, ashamed of being left to
face life alone.
We lay together, holding each other as close as we could. I remember
feeling overcome with everything Igor was to me. I felt friendship,
love, and a stirring of emotion I didn’t understand then. I never knew
what to think of my feelings for Igor. He wasn’t like my other friends.
He made me feel special, and he made me feel excited too. My face
always flushed when he looked into my eyes. My heart raced, and my
body trembled, stirred with an attraction I never felt for anyone else.
Still, I didn’t feel the same stirrings that night. The heat that usually
rushed through my body when I was with him was quiet. We shared
only our pain and loneliness. These feelings both of us understood.
We held each other until my eyes collapsed, calling the dream upon
me, continuing where I left off the night before. The dark-skinned
women stared at the two boys as they ran and played across the
sparklingfields of thousand suns. The sky was cloudless, and the grass
was still. It is as if the wind had forgotten this place. The boisterous
antics of two boys broke the stillness of the otherwise quiet afternoon.
The woman approached them with the same stiff smile on her face
and carefully observed their game. Then, she wrapped her arms
27

VITALY
around their tiny bodies, silently inviting them in with the warm scent
of freshly baked food emanating from her apron. She fed them, and
their faces were as happy as their mouths were full. They meticulously
chewed delicious pieces of honey cake still warm from the oven. They
also had almond creme tort, muffins, and chocolate and caramel
candies. They smiled, with her smile hanging above them, watching
them, never letting the curve of her carefully placed lips disappear. She
hugged the children again, and I felt it. I hugged her back, squeezing as
tight as possible, trying to grab hold of some of the love I was missing
in my own life.
I opened my eyes to discover that I was hugging my pillow again.
It was damp with tears. I could tell it was very late as the beds in the
dorm were full of motionless bodies dug deep into sleep, only moving
enough to breathe, and the moon was still shining. It cast a spotlight
on the empty spot where Igor’s body was lying when I fell asleep. The
only thing that remained—to assure me that he had been there—was
a slight depression in the otherwise hard mattress.
I closed my eyes, hoping for the dream to come again, carrying me
to Sunday’s arrival. As I slipped back into slumber, the last thought I
remember having was that of the frozen delight waiting for me on the
other side of the moon’s visit. I knew the morning was not far away.
The sun would soon rise and call me to my next adventure, and Igor
would be there to share it with me.
28

6
Bandits
This playground is typical of what you would still see at many orphanages
in Ukraine, but a lot more grass than we had on Fastivska Street.
A
FTER A LONG AND complicated night, I woke up covered in
sweat. The dorm was empty, and I assumed that everyone
was already downstairs emptying their plates. So I rushed to
the bathroom to freshen up before breakfast.
29

VITALY
As I approached the dining hall, I could hear dozens of forks
and blunt knives rattling and jingling in an imperfect symphony of
satisfaction. I spotted a seat next to the window and took it without
paying attention to who else might be sitting across the table from me.
After settling with my food, I turned my head to see Igor sitting next to
me. I could see he was embarrassed by the chance he had taken, lying
in my bed. He was trying to turn his head away, avoiding my eyes, and
pretending to be the part of an argument that our two friends were
having right across the table.
I watched him, not saying anything until he released his desperate
avoidance and looked back at me. His eyes pleaded with me, asking me
not to tell anyone about what had happened. I wouldn’t anyway, and I
didn’t. I assumed that everyone shared feelings like ours, reaching out
for a small pinch of something tangible. We spent our days without
being hugged, kissed, or put to sleep by a parent reading our favorite
bedtime story. No one talked about it openly, but we all knew we
needed love.
Everything on Fastivska Street was about being brave and strong,
doing what we needed to do to choke down the feelings our young
minds couldn’t understand. With the menacing presence of the Soviet
Union hanging over our heads, each of us found our way to manage.
Still, we needed to find connection, lest we become senseless and cold
to the world and all its people.
I wanted to let Igor know that no one would ever hear about his
sorrow from me, so I acted as if nothing had happened. Then, looking
at him decisively, I casually asked, “Which movie do you think we will
watch today?”
He stopped chewing his toast with jam and stared at his plate as
though something disturbing was resting on it. Then, looking at me,
he smiled for just a moment before looking back at his plate to say,
“I liked the one we saw last Sunday…eventhough it seemed a bit odd.
30

BANDITS
Don’t you think?”
“‘Kingdom of Crooked Mirrors? Did you think it was strange? I
thought it was terrific!”
And with that, we were back to our young little lives. I didn’t say
anything to Igor, but I thought about how I tried to enter the world
behind the mirror once. I stared at my reflection, wondering if I would
find a different reality there, just as the character Olya had done in
the movie. In my case, I hoped for a better life, but Olya discovered
her reflection in the mirror was living in a brainwashed world. In
Olya’s story, the corrupt people never could face themselves, so they
outlawed the mirrors, but for me, I often felt like I lived behind the
mirror, waiting for the real me to come and save the day.
“By the way, where were you the other day?” Igor asked, pulling me
from my dream. “We were cleaning the entire floor in the dorm, and I
didn’t see you once.” His eyes sparkled as he looked at me. I could see
he was trying to read my mind.
As Igor looked at me, I could tell he was feeling a lot better than he
did the night before. I was pleased to see him happier. For us, life was
about repressing the worst things we felt and grabbing hold of the
best moments. Though we were young, we were already so adept at
finding the silver linings we probably made it seem simple. Of course,
it wasn’t, but we were strong, and we made the best of what we could.
My face flushed as I lowered my voice, looking around to see if
anyone listened. Then, I responded with barely a whisper, “I forgot to
tell you that I had to bury the den.”
Igor worked to hold the laughter threatening to burst forth from his
belly, “Oh, yes…I heard about Tamara Perdeyevna,” he said, trying to
continue without laughing. We often called Tamara ‘Perdeyevna.’ Her
middle name was Petrivna, but ‘Perdet’ in Russian means ‘to fart.’ So,
we translated her name from Tamara Petrivna to Tamara Perdeyevna
to make a joke.
31

VITALY
“Hilarious!” he said.
Igor’s laugh was contagious, enchanting me to join his indulgence.
Our laughter wove together in a moment of unified bliss until suddenly,
he became sober. Placing his hand on my shoulder, he whispered
nervously, “She doesn’t think it was us who dug the hole?”
“That’s why I wanted to bury the den,” I told him. “I ran into her
yelling about finding out who did it, and I told her I would fix it. She
named us ‘bandits!’” I finished, bursting into laughter.
Igor’s chest grew proud. I could imagine him thinking about the
word ‘bandits’ with unbreakable might.
Tamara heard us laughing and turned to approach us, wanting
to stop the behavior she found to be repulsive and inappropriate,
especially at the table. With her head rising from the heights of
unquestionable authority, she looked at us, saying, “Looking for
detention?”
Our table became an island of silence, standing out from the sea of
clinking knives and forks. We were afraid to even think about looking
up at her as she towered over us. We knew, if we wanted to go to the
cinema and have that long-awaited ice cream, we were to be silent. So,
we squirreled away our words and explanations until she was beyond
earshot.
I waited to see her focus on someone at the other end of the
room before turning to Igor to share the best secret of all, “I buried
something in the den.”
He looked at me with hunger in his eyes, whispering, “What did you
bury? Tell me, please!” His eyes were begging me to share my secret.
“You will see in a couple of days,” I replied with a smile that
insinuated that my secret was more than precious. It was spectacular,
but we would need to save it for another day. Nothing was so special
to take away our Sunday.
He understood and dropped the subject as quickly as we did the
32

BANDITS
time we spent together in the dorm. We were still just little boys, and
moments only lasted until the next good idea came, and Igor landed
on a new one almost before the last faded from his breath, “Want to
go play catch before we start getting ready?”
I stood up in approval, moving away from my empty plate. Igor
followed me, and we exited the room as Tamara gave us her famously
threatening scowl.
The sun was high as we stepped onto the playground. It curiously
smirked at us through the clouds, the only one besides us who knew
of our hidden treasures. I felt the warmth of it shine on me and could
sense the promise of a good day. As Igor and I began tossing the well-
worn soccer ball, my smile and plans for our next adventure silently
rose to greet our only confidant.
33

7
Octobrists’ Summer
This award was given to me for creativity and participation in the life of
the Octobrists’ Camp.
On the left it says, “Art belongs to the people.” by Lenin.
It also mentions our camp being the 50th Anniversary of Bukovina
reuniting with the USSR.
34

OCTOBRISTS’ SUMMER
W
HEN I WAS STILL A CHILD IN the land of pioneers and red
flags, welived by a set of absolute, Octobrist values, set by
Tsar Nicholas II in October of 1905. Taking recreational
summer camps was one of the delightfully effective ways to plant
those values into young minds. Though the United Soviet Socialist
Republic’s (USSR’s) motives might have been less than inspired, as
kids, we focused on the part of our camp experience that had the word
‘fun’ in it.
Summer was overflowing with an ever-growing number of summer
camps for children, which soon totaled over forty thousand.
As
budding Octobrists, we all longed to be patriots of the communist
party. To be ornamented with a red star pin boasting the face of seven-
year-old Ulyanov Lenin, then known as Volodya Ulyanov, and his curly
golden locks meant we were spreading the young pioneer spirit and
inspiring the nation. We earned the right to wear young Ulyanov’s
star on our chests when our behaviors depicted what the USSR saw as
the spirit of young hopefuls with high potential. We all wanted to be
recognized and praised, so we worked hard to be like Ulyanov.
Before entering initiation to become Octobrists, we first learned
several handy things. We learned to sew our buttons, tie the knot of the
blood-red scarves we would receive one day, and how to memorize the
pioneer oath. A sign hung above the blackboard with the encouraging
words of the commitment written on it to help us remember our
responsibility. Then, whenwe were ready, we would recite the promise
from memory to join the Communist Youth Organization.
Every morning we read the oath aloud. our little, insecure voices
emerged in a single social symphony:
Octobrists are future pioneers
Octobrists are diligent young men who love school and respect their
elders.
35

VITALY
Only those who love work are called Octobrists.
Octobrists are honest, courageous, and skillful.
Octobrists are friendly. They read and draw, play and sing, and live
happily.
High rise our campfires into the blue night,
We are pioneers, the children of the workers,
Near is the time of our best years
And the pioneers’ motto is, ‘Always be ready!’
When we knew the oath, it meant we understood our responsibility as
a member of the Republic of the Soviet Union. They wrote our lives
for us, like pages of a rehearsed book, and celebrated the day when we
were ready to prove our commitment to the communist party.
We all knew our day to join Oktyabrenok would come. Thousands
of children would line up, standing straight, waiting for initiation to
start. Everyone wore black jackets adorned with red stars to show our
success. Under the jackets were white shirts unbuttoned at the neck,
so our perfectly knotted scarves would be visible, showing off the red
order’s unique spirit. After the oath, World War II veterans visited us,
guided us through moral values, teaching us how to be righteous and
noble.
We set off to camp on a pleasant summer morning to begin our
excursion. Octobrists’ camps were a rare opportunity for children like
me to have adventures to remember and cherish. They offered a place
for first kisses, slow disco dances, childish loves, and meeting new
friends. So our bus was buzzing with excited energy and expectations.
I couldn’t resist imagining how everyone had a cloud made of wishes
floating above their heads.
It wasn’t long before we arrived in Boyany, a small town just a few
kilometers east of Chernivtsi. The village sat nestled in a small forest
36

OCTOBRISTS’ SUMMER
not far from the banks of the mighty river Prut. For the next few
months, our home was in a valley just off the edge of the trees. The
well-worn building radiated warmth and comfort, a perfect backdrop
for a field of a thousand knapweeds, daisies, and shy violets; all
gathered in competition to become the sun’s best treasure. Scents
mingled in one divinely forged fragrance that filled my lungs, waking
my appetite and inducing a sparkle in my eyes.
After we exited the bus, our instructors sent us to unpack while they
organized a late breakfast. The rooms where we would stay were neat
and decorated with pleasant minimalism. They furnished each with
one closet made of cherry wood and several skillfully placed beds that
seemed to fill every corner of the space. I was followed into my room
by my friend Lidiya’s careful steps. Behind her, I heard the confident
gait of Slavik, a chubby boy with messy hair and a cheeky attitude.
Slavik was one of my best friends at the orphanage. We were the same
age and shared all our classes. So, it was natural for us to share a room.
I threw myself onto one of the beds, diving into its softness,
testing how well this pillow could compete with my familiar bedtime
companion. Of course, it wasn’t everything I expected. Still, I didn’t
worry about feeling alone. I knew this week would be perfect with my
friends so close at hand.
We weren’t in the room long before they called us to the kitchen.
After a big bowl of porridge complimented with a single cube of some-
thing that tasted like butter, we had a couple of hours to do what we
pleased. We could go anywhere we wanted, as long as we didn’t leave
the camp area. Still, most of the children stayed close, joining together
to play soccer. Everyone was jumping, kicking, throwing, dribbling,
and manipulating the ball in different ways, which—judging by the
look on their faces—was an incredibly satisfying thing to do. So, I
joined in the fun as well.
At camp, Igor was a leader. He was stronger and faster than the rest
37

VITALY
of us. So, he was always the soccer team captain. He ran, jumped,
and threw the ball quickly and precisely, which sometimes made him
think he was right about everything, even if something he was doing
was wrong, like kicking a person right in the shin. I liked Igor, and for
some strange reason, that made me want to fight him, especially when
he was testing me. So, once again, through a disagreement during the
game, Igor and I ended up in a fight.
He was stronger than me, and I enjoyed the challenge of trying to
beat him. I also liked being close to him, tumbling and rolling around
on the ground to see who could come out the winner. I caught his neck
in the crook of my arm and began to squeeze, pushing his head against
a tree. I knew I won today, and I reveled in my victory, waiting for
a request for mercy. Instead, Igor unexpectedly hit me in the face. I
stumbled back in complete bewilderment, wiping blood from my nose.
He won, and I could see he thought this proved he was right, but he
wasn’t. I was ready to burst into tears. I was not too fond of the smug
look on his face and today was the day for me to win.
I didn’t want anyone to see my pain, especially Igor, so I ran from
the field. I didn’t want to kick and chase the ball in a game where your
opponents gave you ‘friendly’ incentives by kicking your shins.
I didn’t know where I could go. I felt almost called by those little
daisies in the field. So I ran toward the forest, with its branches rising
as though they might be arms reaching for the runaway clouds.
As I entered the canopy, the fragrance stirred my senses, as though
it might be a cure for every sorrow and sweep away my worry, pain,
and fear. The sun consumed my anguish. I was soothed again by
the pleasant warmth, the wind, and waving branches. The day was
intoxicating, giving me the desire to create and become a part of the
view I was lucky to have.
I didn’t like fighting with Igor, and now, I wasn’t sure if I wanted to
be left alone or would have been pleased to have him here with me. I
38

OCTOBRISTS’ SUMMER
guessed it was both, dancing together to create little storm clouds in
my mind.
They didn’t last. I started looking at the trees around me, collecting
every sound I could.
I listened to the birds singing and tried to
understand them. I wished I could capture the freedom surging across
the grasses and scratching at my nostrils, making me happy to inhale
the thriving life around me.
As I continued to meander, I couldn’t help but think of how it would
feel if I was born in a small cottage isolated by the woods. What would
my life have been with no orphanage but with a mother to love me
instead, freeing me of lonely nights and tear-soaked pillows? I wished
I could live in the quiet of the woods, away from a dorm filled with
hundreds of little lungsbreathing the same stagnantair. I loved nature.
I knew life must be perfect for the people who lived here.
I walked for a while, thinking. Until the soothing symphony of
running water interrupted my longings and grabbed me, making my
imagination bloom instead, retrieving all the parts I lost to endless
sorrow and reasonless regret. The sound was incredible. So, I started
running, trying to catch the noise. With each step, I got bolder and let
my adventurous spirit rise. And then, finally, I found it. The turbulent
river Prut ran in front of me, daring me to run with it. It was one of
the most peaceful yet lively places I’ve ever visited.
We spent hours playing in the river during our stay at camp,
swimming, or jumping from an old collapsed bridge into the blurry
stream of water. The ruins of that bridge remain there to this day to
remind us of our courage. As a child, I always planned my jumps near
the banks, hiding that I didn’t know how to swim. Years later, after I
learned, I returned to what remained of our bridge, and using all kinds
of exhibitions, I demonstrated my power over Prut’s mighty flows.
But on that day, I didn’t dare enter the water. I stood looking
between the path back to camp and the river. I wanted to return to
39

VITALY
my friends, but I also wanted to rush into the waiting river. I looked
at the road and then at the river again, with its stone bridge bathed
in an eternity of flowing water. It stood crooked but firm, with its
roots buried deep into the ground beneath the river. It called to me,
but I was afraid to jump. I thought I would be the river and let the
water wash away everything that existed. I turned back, following the
echo of a trumpet bouncing off the beech trees that told me lunch was
nearly ready.
As I stepped beyond the field of wildflowers, Slavik approached me
soaked in sweat. They were playing soccer for probably more than an
hour. His plump cheeks were rouged bright red, and he was breathing
heavily. Finally, leaning over, he grasped his knees and tried to take
a deep breath. Then, he sat down on the grass. “Where were you?”
he asked, trying to gather the words to create a complete question
between sighs and gasps.
“Too much football, huh, Botsya?” I started laughing. I loved calling
Slavik by his nickname Botsya. He looked so cute, puffy, and was
very funny. I could grab his cheeks and play with them the entire day
without getting tired.
He frowned at me, trying to catch enough air to be able to laugh.
“What were you up to?” he asked, squinting against the sun, now
shining directly into his eyes.
“I wanted to take a walk and look around. Nothing special.” I
answered. Thankfully, the teacher’s voice calling us to lunch rescued
me from needing to say more.
As we returned to the building, I could hear my friends’ playful
screams and joyful chanting as they left their jumping ropes and
overused soccer balls scattered amongst the sunbathed fields and
high grasses. No one but Slavik seemed to notice I was gone, but I
didn’t care. I felt transformed after my journey through the forest,
but it was like the rest of my friends stood frozen in time, unable to
40

OCTOBRISTS’ SUMMER
recognize the opportunities in front of them, or maybe they were just
stubbornly insisting things stay the same.
41

8
Queen of Spades
Baba Yaga from my favorite USSR fairy tale.
I
LOVED CAMP, BUT OUR MEALS weren’t much different from
what we ate at the orphanage. We all sat together in a large
room, eating the same food almost every day. I knew I had to
eat everything, not leaving a single piece, or they would ground me,
and I didn’t want to take the risk, not in this place. I had big plans for
42

QUEEN OF SPADES
my night. So, when it was time to eat, I eagerly cleared my plate.
Looking around, I could see some of my friends had almost finished
their dinner, but I still had several bits of almost raw pork covered with
mashed potatoes on my plate. Worst were the chunks of fat staring
back at me. Breaking away some of the pork, I put it in my mouth. It
was easier for me to chew small bits of meat than to swallow the fat.
So, while I ate, I scanned the room, looking for ways to dispose of the
remaining scraps. That’s when I spotted a dog just a couple of meters
outside of the window. A new idea was born!
I looked around to see where our educators were and found them
busy talking to each other at the other end of the dining room. They
seemed unusually relaxed and happier here. I guessed t
Eyeing them cautiously, I scraped fat pieces from my plate and put
them into the napkin lying beside it. I then wrapped it like a gift and
put it into my pocket. The minute they excused me from the table, I
ran to the field. Unrolling the fat chunks, I fed them to the grateful
dog, who wagged his tail in appreciation.
The dog left more than half of what I gave him. I don’t know if
he already had his food, or maybe he felt the same way I did about
eating so much fat. I wasn’t sure, but it didn’t matter in the end. I just
kicked a little dirt over the place where the last few pieces lay on the
ground and covered my crime. Finally! I would have a vacation from
the orphanage and from eating fat.
“Vitaly!” I froze for a moment, thinking someone caught me, but
then recognized the voice calling me.
Slavik approached, waving his hand in my direction, so I started
walking towards him, with the curious dog in tow.
“Oh, I see you already made a friend!” Slavik laughed and began
petting the dog. “Igor wants to call upon the Queen of Spades tonight.
He said that anyone who doesn’t want to participate is a wimp.”
I had heard older boys talk about the tradition of telling scary stories
43

VITALY
or even playing creepy games at night after the educators went to bed.
Their favorite was a story called ‘A Red Spot, a Black Black Room, and
a White Sheet,’ and I thought they might tell it, but they wanted to
play ‘Queen of Spades’ instead. I was nervous. I heard it was supposed
to be the scariest of all the games.
“We are not wimps, are we?” I frowned, excited and afraid.
Slavik stared at me for a moment, then fired, “No, we are not.”
As the last of the day faded from the sky, we decided to gather in
Igor’s room to make plans. As word spread, the room filled with
curious faces. By the look of most, they weren’t believers. They just
stood in the doorway with mocking expressions on their faces.
I was a believer. I knew the Queen of Spades was a game to evoke
a witch named Baba Yaga. Baba Yaga was the worst of the monsters
from my childhood. She was known to help honorable wanders she
met in the forest, but she was also known to eat children, especially
those who didn’t do as they were told. I thought of the fat I gave the
dog and wondered if this was the best place for me to be tonight. I
was scared she might come for me, but I knew I also did good things. I
tried to do my best, so I decided to keep my thoughts to miracles and
wonders, trying not to give way to dark, ominous things.
Igor was the last to come into the room. He checked to see if anyone
was outside before approaching the group. As he did, he spoke with a
low whisper, “Some of the teachers are sitting near this room, so if
we don’t want to be grounded or interrupted, we better go to another
place.”
It would be time for bed soon, and our educators would be getting to
know the camp staff better, making plans for our summer here. So, we
knew a session of summoning the vicious Queen of Spades wouldn’t
be interrupted tonight if we could get where they couldn’t hear us.
Igor looked around, waiting for someone to volunteer their room by
raising a hand or making a sound, but no one did. I knew it would be
44

QUEEN OF SPADES
impressive to Igor to see me be brave, so I looked at Slavik and raised
my hand.
He lifted his as well. “We’re at the other end of the hall. We can do
it in our room,” Slavik said, speaking with a conviction that sounded
like maybe he was deciding to convince himself.
Everyone agreed, and we quickly made a plan. We moved two by two,
occasionally pausing along the way, so we wouldn’t appear suspicious.
By the time everyone was there, our room was packed. Kids crowded
to find a place to stand. I could tell some of them were excited, but
some were anxious too. The anxious ones hung by the door, with the
kids drowning in skepticism, seeing it was the safest place to be.
Igor dug into his pocket, pulling out a tube of lipstick.
“You are planning on becoming a girl now?”
someone asked,
teasing.
Igor sent him a resentful glance, ignoring friends who could barely
contain their laughter. “Did you bring the candle?” he asked one of
the boys sitting in a circle.
The boy passed a half-burnt candle to Igor wordlessly, trying to
hide the fear I saw reflected in his eyes.
“Now, who knows how to draw a door with the staircase?” Igor
asked, looking around the room, searching through a dozen or so faces.
No one was eager to step forward, but there was no need, “Vitaly? I
saw your drawings from art classes. Will you do it?” He looked at me
with the assurance that I would do a great job.
Knowing I wouldn’t refuse, Igor handed me a hand mirror he found
by a garbage pile at the movie theater. I took it and the lipstick and
started to draw. Before I could finish a single line, I was stopped by
Igor’s voice, “Wait. We first need to turn off the lights and light the
candle.” He dug through his pockets again, searching. “I don’t have
matches….Damn!”
“Well, does anyone have matches?” a voice from the crowd asked.
45

VITALY
Everyone shook their heads in negation.
Igor looked ready to give up, but Slavik finally spoke, “I’ll bring
matches!”
“You are just trying to run away,” Igor said, probably jealous of
thinking he should have had the idea first.
“I think you didn’t bring those matches purposely because you are
too afraid of the Queen of Spades,” Slavik said as he walked through
the door, standing as tall as he could, with his chest puffed in might.
An expression of uneasiness and shame spread fast across Igor’s
face. He leaned against the wall, trying to look casual, but I could
tell he was bothered by Slavik’s comment. We were all friends, but
everything between us was a competition. The girls at the orphanage
were always there to help each other, but the boys spent their days
trying to prove who was best. Slavik had stolen a moment of Igor’s
glory tonight. I could see it.
A few minutes later, Botsya appeared at the door, and looking
straight into Igor’s eyes, pulled the entire box of matches out of his
pocket. Some of the boys started patting Slavik’s back in approval and
acceptance, and he strutted, celebrating his victory. He loved rubbing
his bravado into Igor’s disappointed face.
“So, shall we?” asked Igor, deciding to ignore Slavik’s boasting and
regain his position as leader. He then nodded, and someone switched
off the light, leaving us in the shadows of the trembling flame.
Now, it was my turn. Holding the lipstick tight, I started drawing
the doors first, leaving straight lines of red sticky marks on the mirror
glass. I felt good to do my part, and I loved drawing. It only took a few
seconds to finish the door. Then, I stood back, admiring the accuracy
of my work.
“Perfect!” someone from the crowd remarked.
Igor looked in the mirror dramatically, his face floating yellow
behind the red lines of my drawing. Then, he began to whisper,
46

QUEEN OF SPADES
chanting the exact five words over and over until we all joined in a dull
symphony:
The Queen of Spades, come!
The Queen of Spades, come!
The Queen of Spades, come!
We chanted the words withIgor until he raised his hand, silentlytelling
us to stop. The quiet that followed was thick with our fear and with
something more as we waited for The Queen of Spades to reveal herself.
Suddenly, the mirror started trembling, and Igor dropped the candle.
The impact snuffed it out, taking away the only source of light we
had. Gasps cut through the room, sounding magnified against our
fear. Everyone in the room was trying to be brave. No one wanted to
be the one whose legs shook, even when standing in the face of an
unexplainable horror.
Igor’s whisper sharpened, “Everybody, back up!”
As our eyes adjusted to the darkness, I could see his reflection
still floated eerily, lit by moonlight cast through the small bedroom
window. “Nobody move! Who did that?” his voice was trembling, soft
like the night I found him lying in my bed. “Who moved the mirror?”
No one answered.
“Is it supposed to do that?” I asked.
Igor shrugged, “I don’t know what it’s supposed to do.”
Footsteps echoed all around us, like a predator stalking us, but we
couldn’t see who was taking them. Everyone was looking around
to see if anybody was moving, but we were all frozen, paralyzed by
unwelcomed fear.
Some boys began to panic, but my body was flooded with adrenaline,
making my heart beat faster. I felt excited and alive and as if I was
standingon the edge of something magical until one of the boys turned
47

VITALY
on a light.
The shift assaulted my senses. I squinted against it, but the feeling of
someone being in the room with us didn’t disappear with the shadows.
I could still feel it as it lingered, floating from boy to boy like a prophecy
of impending doom.
Although no one would admit their fear, boys started leaving the
room, creating excuses to avoid spending a second more in this
torment. Others sat on the ground, gawking and trying to sort the
millions of questions swarming in their naive minds. I was afraid, but
I didn’t go. I wanted to see if what I was feeling was real, or maybe
just my mind playing tricks on me.
However, I didn’t have much time to explore the question before
the sound of our teachers’ footsteps moving through the halls told me
we would soon be in the dark again. We would be stuck with the crazy
witch still floating over our sleeping bodies.
I didn’t want to spend my night being chased by Baba Yaga, but I
had an idea. “Does anyone have a deck of cards?” I asked.
“Actually, I brought one along,” Slavik said, beaming again at his
readiness and desire to show everyone that he was not afraid.
“Ready to lose it?” I asked with anticipation, hoping that my plan
would work.
Slavik started going through his unpacked suitcase, looking for a
deck of cards. I wasn’t surprised he brought them. We liked to play
card games when it was raining out. So, it turned out to be perfect.
While Slavik collected the cards, I sent someone else to find some
electrical tape, rubber bands, or something similar that could help us
put the cards together.
We used the tape and a rubber band I found and wrapped the deck
of cards tight. I wasn’t worried about the other cards in the deck but
feared the Queen of Spades might find her way free to ambush us in
our sleep.
48

QUEEN OF SPADES
After making sure the deck was packed nice and tight, we put the
cards away in the wardrobe and moved the bed closest to it a little
further into the room. We didn’t know what The Queen would do if
she caught us, but no one wanted to be too close to a Baba Yaga. So,
we decided to play it safe.
Besides Slavik and me, two other boys also slept in our room. One
was visibly frightened, probably because his bed was closest to the
cabinet. “Hey, guys?” he asked, gaining our attention. “Do you maybe
want to go to the next room? Maybe one of the older kids knows what
we could do…“.
I still didn’t feel sure about my plan. So, it sounded like a brilliant
idea to me. We all agreed and followed him to the room next to ours,
knocking on the door. A tall boy with messy blond hair named Andrej
opened it. “Hey, friends! What are you up to?”
We told Andrej and his roommates about what happened. As we
finished the story, one of them headed out the door, saying, “I think I
know what to do. Follow me.”
Trembles of anxiety, insecurity, and fear twitched in my muscles
like a million tiny ants as I watched him head straight to our room. We
followed him eagerly, hoping to alleviate our worries before bedtime.
I wanted my fear to go away and struggled to convince myself that
the footsteps and mirror were only an illusion we created, or maybe a
trick someone had played. My reasoning suggested I was right, but
my experience told me another story. I preferred thinking it was just
an illusion created from a mysterious atmosphere. Still, my mind
wouldn’t surrender its worry. All I could think was I wanted that
Queen of Spades out of our bedroom.
“The deck is in the cabinet, right?” the boy asked as he entered the
room.
We nodded in unison, waiting to see what the boy would do.
He opened the wardrobe door cautiously, seized the deck of cards,
49

VITALY
and closed the door again. Then, turningback to us, he said, “I suppose
someone has a box of matches?” He looked around, waiting for a
response from our frozen faces, and opened his hand.
Slavik pulled the matches from his pocket, placing the box in the
boy’s hand. The boy unwrapped the deck, flipping through the cards
until he came to the Queen of Spades. When he found her, he tossed
the rest of the deck on the bed. Then, lighting one of the matches, he
brought it to the corner of the card.
We all watched as the Queen melted, bending and fading to black
until it eventually disappeared. Then, when there was nothing left,
the boy picked up the deck from the bed, wrapping it up again and
placing it back in the cabinet.
“That ought to do it!” he said, confidently rubbing his hands.
Andrej and his roommate left the room chuckling, leavingus puzzled
but somewhat satisfied with the outcome. The rest of us moved
nervously, trying to go back to the place in our minds where this had
never happened. I picked up the mirror, wiping away the door and
staircase I had drawn less than an hour ago to make sure she could
never return.
No one spoke as we turned off the lights and rolled ourselves up in
our sheets. We all lay silently, curled in protective postures, twitching,
and hiding behind our pillows. I could still hear the footsteps echoing
in the hall like Baba Yaga was finally coming for us. I wondered if
the other boys could hear them too because I knew; even if we didn’t
believe we were terrible little children, maybe she did.
* * *
I entered my dream flying high, cherished by the clouds, and loved by
50

QUEEN OF SPADES
the sky above me, and even though I was there, with nothing to protect
me and nowhere to hide, I felt safe and free. Power ran through my
limbs as my arms transformed into the wings I always wanted to have.
I could see my friends calling to me from below, with their arms
waving and bodies begging me to notice them. Then, a shadow crossed
my face, devouring my peace. I flew faster, trying to escape the
darkness. Going forward, I did not look back, but my friends were
still standing below me, no matter how far I flew.
When I did look back at the shadows that followed me, feelings of
uneasiness stabbed at my chest, causing the poison of fear to spread
across my body. It coursed through my arms and legs, slowing my
progress, draining my strength and will. I wanted to return for my
friends, but the thing chasing me threatened me with eyes lit like fire.
If I stopped for even a moment, I knew it would catch me and take me
down to be one of the frightened screaming faces.
I reached for the last of my strength, trying to free myself of the
beast’s paralyzingpursuit. Still, it pulledat me, slowingme down. Fear
swelled in me, making me nauseous and full of pain. The air became
fire, searing my throat and lungs with each breath as the clouds around
me darkened, mirroring the creature’s color. My friends were still
there, with their screams ripping my mind apart. I was afraid to look
at them. I was sure that the ground below was trembling, making the
sky quake as well. I couldn’t save them. I didn’t think I could even
save myself.
The fear ate at me, threatening to undo me until I saw the house
peacefully nestled amid a cluster of trees near the edge of the horizon.
As I flew closer, I saw a field of proud daisies surrounding it. They
seemed to watch as I approached.
I landed with unexpected ease and an overflowing feeling of safety.
The dark threatening mass faded the moment I connected with the
ground, and the sound of my friend’s tormented screams faded behind
51

VITALY
the sound of voices coming from inside the house. I stepped forward,
peeking through the window to take in a perfect view. Five little
heads leaned over their plates, eating, talking, and giggling, while
their mother and father looked over them, satisfied with the pleasant
surroundings.
I felt like I belonged inside. I wanted to be inside. I looked back to
see if the dark blur of fire and coal had followed me to this perfect
place, but all I saw were trees growing to protect and hide me.
As I turned to peer again through the window, I saw the woman
standing, pointing in my direction. I knew I must be in trouble,
watching them and wishing I could be inside. So, I tried to escape. I
tried to fly, to be embraced by the sky again, but before I could push my
body away from the ground, she was outside with me, gently grabbing
my arm and inviting me in. The whole family was there, letting me
know that I was safe.
The inside of their home was warm and inviting. Everyone was kind
and accepting. I sat with them, frightened and hurt, lost and confused.
I was so happy to be safe, away from the dark cloud chasing me, but I
left my friends to the dark blur of teeth and fire. As I realized the depth
of my betrayal, my tears flowed. How could I be so happy, knowing
I had left them with that beast. With each tear, the air around me
cooled, and the sky grew dark until finally, the rain came. I listened to
the raindrops tapping on the roof, knowing each was for my friends
as the sky cried with me.
“What is your name?” a little voice asked me.
I turned to see a small child looking up at me, wrappedup in innocent
curiosity. “Vitaly…Myname is Vitaly”, I said, rubbing tears from my
face.
“Vitaly!” he screamed, playing, “Vitaly! Vitaly! Vitaly!”
“Vitaly! Vitaly! Wake up!”
I opened my eyes, assailed by the barrage of words coming from
52

QUEEN OF SPADES
my educator’s mouth. When he saw I was awake—thanks to his
thoughtful yelling in my face—he continued calling out to the rest
of the boys. He unleashed names, contaminating the air with his
shouting and breaking the mist of pleasant dreams along the way.
“It’s breakfast time, and unless you get up and get ready, we will
be late for recreational activities. Come on, boys! The new day has
already begun.”
We bid farewell to our beds and staggered across the room to search
for clothes.
“Hey, guy! Look at this! Unbelievable!” Slavik was in front of the
opened wardrobe holding burnt cards like an offering in his hands.
As we examined the deck, I noticed charred scars on only the suit of
spades, well, most of them anyway. There was one undamaged spade
in the deck, the Queen. She lay crisp and clean atop the pile, slyly
mocking us with her twisted gaze.
As gasps and awes grew, a crowd gathered, but no one knew what to
say or do until Slavik ran from the room, taking the cards with him.
They all followed, but I stayed behind, checking the closet for evidence
of a trick. I even checked Slavik’s bag to see if he had an extra deck
of cards, but I couldn’t find anything, not a match or even the rubber
band that bound the cards the night before.
I was in the room searching for some time. However, I eventually
decided to surrender. If Slavik and Igor were playing a trick on us, I
knew one of them would tell me. I didn’t know if Baba Yaga was now
sharing a room with us, but I was hungry.
As I entered the cafeteria, I saw Slavik calmly eating bread, jam, and
butter with tea on the side. To look at him, you would have assumed
nothing remarkable had happened.
I sat next to him, asking, “Where are the cards?”
53

9
Zarnitsa
As kids, we played sports, games, and developed talents
A
FTER FINISHING OUR BREAKFAST, our educators sent us
outside to embrace every opportunity this beautiful day gave
us. Distant fields, blanketed with inviting lilies, emitted the
delightful scent of early summer.
We split up into the different games we created from having nothing
54

ZARNITSA
and played until we heard the voice of Ludwig Viktorovych cutting
through the laughs and screams of our joyous creations. “Okay, boys
and girls, round up!” Ludwig said, inviting us to join him.
The air was intoxicatingly fresh, and I wanted to dip my toes in the
river, catch the sun with the daisies and find the perfect place to build
a bonfire, but our educator had something different in mind. “We are
playing Zarnitsa today!” he said with exuberance, passing his joy to
the children standing around him. “For those who don’t know what
Zarnitsa is, I will explain the rules, and then we can start playing!”
We were all ears, intrigued by the potential of a new challenge.
“Zarnitsa is an exercise that has different thematic military games.
We will be playing targeting today.” Octobrist Camp was always a fun
adventure, but it had a purpose too. Many of our games were also
military drills, training us to be ready if ever called to battle. They
challenged us, but in a playful way, making us want to learn.
Ludwig turned, gesturing towards the forest. “We will be playing
in the woods,” he said, “but don’t worry. It’s completely safe.” He
wanted to comfort us, but we weren’t afraid—well, the boys weren’t
anyway. The girls asked to stay on the field and make up another
game, but my friends were ready to have an adventure, and so was
I. My heart leaped with excitement. I would finally have a chance to
wander through the forest after all.
The instructor told the girls they could stay. Then, he guided us to
our next task. “I have divided you into two groups, and each group
will have its color. That is what these are for.” He raised his hand to
show us blue and red strips of cloth. “I will divide you equally myself.”
As he started calling our names, he distributed colors. Slavik and
I ended up in different groups. I was wearing a blue banner while he
wore blood-red. Some boys were left confused when the ribbons ran
out, and they had no color and no team.
“You will wear your colors somewhere visible, so your teammates
55

VITALY
and opponents can see which group you are. It’s a good idea to wrap
them around your arms or heads. Slavik will be the team leader of red,
and…” he looked over at my team, “Vitaly, will be leading the blue
team,” Although I enjoyed being in charge, I started sweating. I knew
I would get credit if we won, but being a leader meant everyone would
blame me if we failed.
“You will need to come up with a strategy for your team,” he
continued as we each found a place to tie our bands. “If your flag gets
ripped off or taken, that, unfortunately, means you are out and must
come back to the field. If it is only half torn, you can compete but are
forbidden to run. The boys without sashes will be our judges to prevent
anyone from being tempted to cheat. I will also be watching.” He
paused to give us a significant look of warning before continuing, “No
fighting, no beating, no kicking, no biting. We are playing a friendly
military game. It is about strategy, not aggression. So any violence
will disqualify you.
“I’ve set flags at your base camps, one red and one blue. The goal is
to find and take your opponent’s flag. To win, you must either capture
all the opposing team’s bands or seize the flag and bring it to the field.
I already set the bases, so follow me.”
We followed Ludwig into the forest. After a few minutes of walking,
he stopped and said, “Red team, you will go left and continue in a
straight line until you find your base. I marked it with the red flag,
whichyou must protect. The blue team willgo right, following the path
to their base. You will recognize it by the blue flag, which you will need
to protect. While you find your bases and work on your strategies, I
will set the watchers. Remember, we are playing fair, with no violence.
Now go!”
Slavik and I waved at each other. Then, we disappeared in opposite
directions.
Everyone was running, driven by the divine rush of
adrenaline in our systems. The energy made me wonder whether
56

ZARNITSA
I was excited or frightened. I felt both.
My team progressed through the woods, looking for our base. After
about ten minutes of running, one of my teammates shouted, “Hey!
Look!” He pointed at a rising hill where a large blue banner stood
surrounded by a dozen or so lesser flags of the same color. I gazed at
our base camp, inspired to protect the majestic prize at our hill’s peak.
There were seven players on each team, all of us equally matched.
As I was the one leading us to victory, everyone on my team stood
looking at me the minute we reached our flag. “So what do we do?”
one of them asked.
I forgot the game and tried to think of a way to make my tongue
move. “What do we do?” I thought. “How will I beat Slavik and his
team?”
I imagined running, trying to grab the other teams’ sashes. Then,
a plan started to form in my mind. I forgot my fears, and the words
came, “Well…I was thinking that two of us should hide here while the
rest split into two groups, each heading to either side of the red base.”
“That sounds great!” Andriy shouted. He was first to approve, and
soon after, the rest of our team agreed. I was glad he was in my group
since he always liked to be competitive but fair in sports.
I continued, flattered by the pleasant validation I received from my
teammates: “Does anyone want to stay here and guard our flag?”
Two of my teammates quickly volunteered, looking at each other
and me, laughing.
I nodded. “So, here is the plan. They probably won’t suspect that
we have anyone lurking around here, so stay hidden. Then, you can
surround him and take off his streamer if anyone comes toward the
flag. If you only tear it, you can still catch him since he won’t be able
to run. Okay?”
They nodded simultaneously. So, I proceeded, rushed by the ticking
clock and bursts of self-esteem, “If two or more come, stay low. Wait
57

VITALY
until you find a good chance to rip off their bands. Just remember to
keep them away from taking the flag or your sashes.
“The rest of us will go in search of their base. Two of us will travel
through the trees, intercepting any who try to head toward our base,
and the group of three will carefully go towards their main flag. Okay?”
“Yes! Let’s do it!” they all said excitedly, almost in a single voice.
Andriy and I worked together. We searched the trees while the rest of
our group headed towards the red camp. Moving from tree to tree, we
tried to remain invisible while watching for anyone approaching our
base. Our friendssped up, split one by one, appearingand disappearing
between the bark and low branches as they carefully drew on the red
camp.
“Should we wait?” asked Andriy.
“I think yes…webetter wait for a while.”
We waited silently, listening for any noise in the woods around us.
Then, after several minutes of nothing, Andriy came to sit where I was,
crawling through the high grass to stay hidden on his way.
“No one is around,” he said, leaning against both me and the giant
tree I was using as a backrest. He was fit and athletic, and I could feel
his weight against my body. Heat rose in me, reminding me of what it
felt like to have a high fever. Suddenly, my clothes felt too warm and
my head too light. I wanted to escape the heat, but I wanted to stay
there and surrender to it too.
I wanted to explore the feeling, but it distracted me from the game.
My friends needed me if we were to win, and more than any other
feeling, I wanted to win. So, I pulled away, pretending to look through
the grass, and said, “Maybe we should spread out and look around…
Our team is probably covering us ahead.”
“Or they lost their banners,” he joked with a sparkling smile.
I looked at him, pausing for seconds that seemed like an eternity. I
wondered for a moment if it was his heart I felt pounding in my chest
58

ZARNITSA
and not mine. “Well, let’s hope that’s not the case,” I said, smiling
back at him.
“Any sign of the Queen?” Andriy asked with a serious expression
on his face.
“So, you believed the story? You believe in the Queen of Spades?” I
was surprised.
“Well, you said she was there…plus,you were all scared.”
I flushed, embarrassed. “I was not scared!” I said shakily. I wanted
to defend my honor, but it ended up sounding like I was trying to
convince myself as much as him.
He put his hand on my shoulder, “Vitaly. It’s okay…evenif you were
scared… but you weren’t, as you say,” he finished, looking away. His
comforting voice had the hint of a friendly tease to it. But then, it
faded as he looked at me with a more stoic expression. “It’s all right.
Everyone gets frightened sometimes.”
I knew he meant it, but I was too embarrassed to look at his eyes
or say anything. So, I just pretended I was looking through the trees,
watching for anyone approaching.
The silence hung for a moment when we were suddenly startled
by the sound of twigs breaking nearby. I looked up to see one of the
red bands standing out from the spectrum of forest green. I grabbed
Andriy, dragging him closer to the tree. Then, putting one hand over
his mouth, I pointed the other in the direction of the red intruder.
Andriy took a glance, then laid back onto the tree, leaning his body
even closer to mine. I knew our time alone in the woods would soon
be over. So, I buried myself in the feeling for just a moment. Then, I
let it go, and so did he.
“I will get out and distract him, and you jump out a few seconds
later and grab his flag. Okay?” His voice was barely audible, kept low
as Igor approached us, completely unaware of what awaited him only
a step or two away.
59

VITALY
A second after I nodded in confirmation, Andriy jumped out of our
hiding spot.
“Look what we have here!” he laughed, teasing Igor.
“Oh, Andriy. It’s great to see you. Let me borrow your band for a
while!”
They started circling each other, but just before I was about to leap
from my hiding place, I spotted another boy approaching. They were
trying to ambush Andriy. So, I waited for the other red team member
to move towards them, so I could jump on him and take off his flag.
Igor kept Andriy distracted as the second boy crept past me. The
moment his back was to me, I ran towards them, determined to
win and regain the honor I lost with the dreaded Queen of Spades.
Everything happened in slow motion. I could feel my teeth vibrating
as my feet slammed against packed soil. My heart responded, traveling
from my chest to my throat, pounding. Igor spotted me, but it was too
late. The blue flag was already in my hands before he could even open
his mouth to give a warning.
I looked around to see if more of them approached and saw one of
the watchers clapping and pointing his thumb in approval. I felt my
pride restored, but I couldn’t stay to celebrate. Andriy needed my help.
As I looked at him, he was already stripping Igor’s flag. He had
taken advantage of the distraction I created and leaped to add another
victory for our team.
Igor suddenly started to yell and scream.
The watcher turned to look at them as he approached. His focus had
been on me, but he needed to respond to Igor’s screams. Assuming
Igor’s cries were from pain, the watcher held up a hand, “No kicking,
no beating, no violence. That’s what Ludwig said. You probably hit
him, Andriy, so you are disqualified.”
Igor and his teammate didn’t say anything. They just leaned against
a tree, one of them laughing and the other shooting knowing glances
60

ZARNITSA
at Andriy.
“I didn’t kick him or hit him!” Andriy said furiously. “But now I
will!”
He lept at Igor, knocking him to the ground.
The watcher and I jumped in to break them apart. The watcher
turned to Andriy, “You need to return his flag to him. He has another
chance.”
“Come on! You saw him! He is laughing! I didn’t do anything!”
Andriy was trying to defend himself. “He is only trying to get me
disqualified because we captured their flags.”
“I don’t think Andriy would have done that,” I said. “I saw what
happened.”
“And I don’t think Igor would have faked someone attacking him,”
said the other boy.
We all looked at Igor. I could see he was hiding his guilt, but he
didn’t budge.
Andriy was mad, and I felt like I could scream. Still, we knew there
was nothing we could do.
“Here you go!” Andriy said, throwing the red sash at Igor, who
immediately tied it around his arm. He occasionally glanced at Andriy
with a look of satisfaction on his face.
“And here is another,” said Andriy, throwing his blue band to the
watcher.
As Andriy headed towards the field, I thought about how unfair it
was that Igor could get away with cheating, but I had an idea. I looked
at the watcher and asked, “The game is on?”
He nodded. So, I waited for Igor to stand, and when he did, I grabbed
his arm and took his band, putting it in my pocket with the other sash
I had won.
“Huh? Wait! You can’t do that! He can’t do that,” Igor yelled,
looking at the watcher.
61

VITALY
The watcher laughed. I think he knew what Igor did wasn’t fair, and
he liked how I found a way to win. “Yes, he can!” he said. “The game
is on. Get off the field, boys. You’re out.”
I took one last look at three of them as they left. I was disappointed
that Andriy was out of the game. I wanted to join him and continue
our time on the sunny field of daisies and lilies, but I felt it was my
duty to stick with my team. I wanted to win.
He looked back at me, waved, and smiled in approval of what I had
done. I was glad he didn’t see me as weak.
Turning back to the game, I decided to take a different path and
move forward to where I thought their camp might be—heading in
the direction of where I first saw Igor. I snuck through the forest,
using trees as my cover, and it wasn’t long before I saw a boy just a
few meters away, hiding behind a tree. I glanced at his arm and saw
that his band was blue. It was one of the boys from my group.
“Hey, Volodymyr!” I said in a hushed voice, “Over here!”
He was looking around, trying to determine where I might be. I
peeked from behind the thorn bush, where I was hiding, holding my
hand high in the air. He looked around to make sure no one was
approaching. Then, he came to hide beside me.
“Where are the others?” I asked.
“They are down. A couple of them tried to ambush us, but we
managed to take one of their flags,” he answered, pulling a red banner
from his pocket.
“Good job. They disqualified Andriyj. Igor claimed that he hit him.
Liar!” I was angry. “But, I have their bands, so we are square.”
“Wow! So, with two of our guys back at base camp, that leaves four
against four over here. Do we go for their flag?”
“We go for their flag,” I replied. “But we will hide behind the trees
and intercept whoever passes through. That way, we can increase our
chances. Okay?”
62

ZARNITSA
Volodymyr nodded in approval. “Deal!”
We moved quickly. I was proud of my new strategy and wanted to
get to their base before they got to ours.
We notice someone coming through the woods in no time, moving
toward our camp. I locked on his flag, so I told Volodymyr, “We will
let him progress further just a few more seconds. Then, we are onto
him. We will attack from behind, but we need to make sure none of
the reds are behind us before we move. Okay?”
“Okay,” Volodymyr replied.
We could see no one was following him, so we began creeping up
from behind him, waiting for the right moment to attack. I noticed
one of the watchers could see us from the side, but the boy from the
red team didn’t even know we were there. Since I was sure he wouldn’t
be able to fake being hurt, I jumped in front of him, quickly removing
his band. Everything happened so fast that the watcher didn’t even
notice that another boy had just been sent back to the field. So, I held
up the band and yelled, “Out! One down!”
The watcher smiled and asked the disappointed boy to follow him
to the field.
We had the red team outnumbered. So, we decided to lay low and
wait to see if more reds would come. Once we saw that no one was
around, we decided to go forward and try to take the flag.
As we approached their camp, we could see there were only three of
them left, and that is when I saw Slavik nearing our hiding place, but
judging by his look, I knew that he hadn’t spotted us yet. Competing
against Slavik wasn’t pleasant at all, but I still wanted the blue team
to win, so I put my finger to my mouth, prompting Volodymyr to be
quiet until Slavik was out of sight.
Once I was sure that Slavik had moved away, we jumped out from
the trees, yelling as if we were savages. The two boys were surprised
by our attack and didn’t know what to do. Their mistake was that one
63

VITALY
of them had climbed up the hill to guard the place where the red flag
sat buried deep into the ground.
The other boy tried to take my band, but I knew how to make a secure
knot. So, he wasn’t able to take it off that easily. I managed to quickly
remove his sash as he was trying to take mine, and Volodymyr took
the cue. He didn’t even think of the boy protecting the hill. Instead,
he ran toward the flag, pulling it from the ground while the other boy
tried to take his blue mark.
With another red trophy in my hands, I started running towards
Volodymyr to help him. The other boy saw me coming and hurried his
efforts, finally succeeding at the exact moment as Volodymyr claimed
their flag.
A split second later, I claimed my fourth red band, the flag from
Volodymyr’s assailant. I knew Slavik was well on his way to our base
camp, but there was no time to return and fight for his base. Taking
the base flag into my hand, I knew that victory was ours!
That night at dinner, Slavik and I were talking about the game. “You
won because I had hopeless cases,” he whispered, looking around to
search for the faces he was accusing.
“Oh, yes, we won because of that!” I laughed at Slavik’s hurt pride
and made him laugh as well.
“On the bright side, Slavik, you were the last man standing, so that
is something right there,” I said, trying to lift his spirits.
He pondered the ceiling like he was considering a menu of responses
written there. “Well, that’s true..,” he replied, puffing his chest,
soaked in the pride he got back after just one sentence.
“Did you know that there is a Talent show tomorrow?” he asked,
taking the win and moving on to the next competition.
“Really?” I asked attentively. I loved singing and dancing, so I was
always looking for a chance to show it.
“What were you thinking of preparing for the show?” I asked Slavik.
64

ZARNITSA
“Well, maybe I could act or something….Ididn’t think about it. I’ll
figure something out. What will you do?”
“I don’t know…,”I replied, considering my options with pleasant
anticipation.
65

10
Talent Show
I am performing a Yoga move during a talent show
I
WAS TIRED FROM THE DAY’S ACTIVITIES, but the exhaustion
wasn’t nearly as powerful as the lightning strikes of absolute
satisfaction I had when I won Zarnitsa. My pride pooled with
blissful thoughts of what it would be like to win the talent show, as
well. So, I went to bed satisfied and happy, not thinking of all that was
66

TALENT SHOW
missing in my life.
I lay for a while thinking of what I wanted to do for the talent
show and how everyone would love it. Still, it wasn’t long before
the exhaustion weighed heavy on my eyelashes and crawled into my
nostrils, slowing my breath.
Soon, I was dreaming again.
The woman was back.
She was
beautiful as she watched the two boys playing in the field of lilies
and wallflowers. Every inch of the vibrant green grass was bathed in
bright sunlight, drawing out her artificial smile. No one could see me
watching. I was present, but my body wasn’t there. I was a sentinel,
analyzing every move. I could pause when I wanted, speed up or slow
down the time, and stop or rewind it slowly.
The fair-skinned boy glanced at the woman, and I could see what he
was thinking. He was not as small as he was before. He saw through
her twisted grin and how she always tried to make everything perfect,
forgetting that humans aren’t and never will be. The woman would
sometimes go out, still holding onto her smile, but the boy knew that
she would put that same smile away every time she turned her back.
Her heart was shrouded in secrecy, dark as the starless night. She was
a genuine Baba Yaga, the Queen of Spades, hiding beneath her youth
and beauty.
I could see how the older boy stood by, ready to protect the young
one no matter what, but he didn’t have the heart to reveal the truth to
the golden child, who still looked upon his mother with unwavering
admiration and love.
I woke from the dream feeling like a bus had run over me. Besides
the hard work of yesterday’s victory, I was tired of vivid dreams and
trying to understand the people in them.
I lay in my bed for some time, unable to get up until I remembered
there was a talent show scheduled for that night. The moment I
realized, I jumped from my bed, dreams forgotten, and began my
67

VITALY
daily preparations.
The day sped by, and I ran with it, feeling like there would never be
enough time to finish my chores and prepare for the show. I rushed as
fast as I could, thinking the whole time of what I needed. Still, the sun
was already low in the sky as I finished the last of my responsibilities
and went immediately to Valentyna Vasylivna, asking her to lend me a
dress and some makeup. She was stunned by my question but amused
as well. Her eyes filled with anticipation, pondering what I would do
as my talent.
I ran back to my room with the dress held close to my chest. My eyes
darted the halls, checking the nearly empty corridors to be sure no
one could see what I was doing. I knew I had finished my work ahead
of most of my friends, so I rushed again to hide the dress under my
bed. Then, I ran back to the dining room for dinner.
“Where were you?” Slavik asked, stuffing his mouth with mashed
potatoes as he spoke.
“Upstairs, preparing my act for tonight,” I said slyly, digging into
my plate as well. I didn’t want to say anything else. So, I just looked
at him, knowing more questions would come, questions I wouldn’t
answer.
“Oh!” Slavik was excited, “you know what you will do? Tell me, tell
me, tell me, tell me!”
Slavik loved to do that. He knew I never liked to say “no” to him,
but this time was different. I was determined. So, I smiled, saying,
“Let’s make it a surprise.”
Slavik wasn’t satisfied with my answer. “Vitaly, pleeeeeease tell me!
Please??” He was jumping on his chair, holding his fingers crossed
with hope.
“You will see in a few moments when I start preparing,” I said,
laughing. “Okay?”
“Oh, it will be funny, won’t it?” he continued, hoping to catch me
68

TALENT SHOW
another way, but I just smiled back at his question.
Slavik interpreted my smile as affirmation and peacefully continued
with his dinner, leaving me to mine, as well.
Not long after we cleaned our plates, I went upstairs to get ready,
followed by Slavik’s untamable curiosity. When we arrived, Slavik just
stood in the doorway, waiting to see what was next. “So?” he asked.
I ceremoniously retrieved the dress from under my bed, waiting to
see his reaction.
“You are going to dress up as a girl?” Slavik was stunned. “That is
hilarious!”
I wasglad Slavik liked my idea, but I needed to prepare if I hoped to be
ready on time. So, I took out the makeup Valentyna lent me, applying
color to my face. Since I wasalready good at drawing, applyingmakeup
came naturally. In very little time, I created a true masterpiece on my
face.
“Wow, Vitaly, anyone could mistake you for a girl,” Slavik said.
I don’t think I have ever been happier than I was at that moment.
Slavik said I looked like a girl, and I liked how that made me feel. My
high-pitched voice brought me trouble with older kids many times,
but I felt more like myself in the dress I was wearing than with any
of the clothes the orphanage provided, and now I planned to use it to
win the competition.
I chose the funny theme song from “Blue Scarf” that I liked a lot. It
was about a cockroach, and I planned to perform it as a female opera
singer, using my feminine voice and appearance to convince the crowd
and the judges that I deserved to win.
I had always enjoyed singing, dancing, and being praised for
expressing myself artistically. So, I knew this would be easy for me.
Still, my heart pounded as I left the room and headed towards the gym,
where the talent show was about to begin. Everyone was gathering
in the hall, anxiously glancing at each other, silently judging their
69

VITALY
competition.
I didn’t worry about the other competitors. I was caught in the
moment, thinking about my performance and trying not to forget
the words. So, I barely heard or saw anything. I gave the last of my
attention to listening for my name.
“Vitaly Mahidov! Please, come to the stage!” The voice cut through
the gym, echoing across the high ceiling to land in front of me. I froze
for a moment, unsure if it was me they were calling.
“Vitaly?”
“I’m coming!” I yelled, hurrying to my moment, but frankly, I
wasn’t as fast as I wanted to be. Running in a dress was not as easy as
I thought. Still, being comfortable in my disguise helped me relax and
tame my wildly beating heart.
I came to the stage dressed to easily fool anyone who didn’t hear my
name bursting the bubble of noise in the auditorium, and I owned the
part. Everyone was clapping in anticipation, waiting for me to feed
their curiosity.
It was fun wearing makeup and a dress, feeling and looking like a
girl. So, I inhaled, holding my breath until the melody carried me to
my moment. Then, words burst forth from my heart,
In the old, rotten trunk
Fleas are dancing the quadrille.
In small gray pajamas
A small bug approached a bald flea.
‘Tell me, flea, do you love Vaska-bug?
If you do not love him, then you will break his heart,
And he will run away forever!’
‘No,’ said the flea.
‘I do not like Vaska-bug.
I like the cockroach from under the sofa!’
70

TALENT SHOW
‘Okay, my friend, bye-bye!’
People clapped and began standing, screaming my name even before
I closed my mouth. Their acceptance was intoxicating. I bowed to the
audience, and their clapping intensified, filling the entire room with
the sound of my success. The night was mine.
Filled with pride, I watched as the last of the children finished their
performances, but none were as passionate as mine. When the evening
approached its end, I heard my name called again. Carried by claps
and cheers, I cut through the crowd towards the stage. They awarded
me one certificate of honor for my victory and a second for active
participation in the social life of the Ivushka Summer Camp.
As I exited the stage a second time, my head felt lighter than a cloud,
shined on by the pleasant smiles of my friends and teachers. I did it. I
had achieved my goal, and this time, I did it just by being myself.
71

11
Botsya’s Mother
This is Botsya, my dear friend and foster brother Slavik. He was so cute
and chubby that we
called him Botsya, which meant, little fatty. He loved to be called Botsya.
B
ORSCHT WAS A STAPLE OF MY childhood and is one of my
favorite things to eat. To this day, I eat it more times a week
72

BOTSYA’S MOTHER
than I eat anythingelse, and I prepare it with the same careful
attention most Ukrainian families use. My mouth is wateringas I think
of it; chunks of meat with onions, potatoes, beans, and carrots left
to simmer for hours in a beet and tomato broth. I serve it with garlic,
sour cream, and crispy bread. It’s something I’ve eaten my entire life.
Between meals of fatty pork bits with mashed potatoes and boiled
spicy beans with beef, we ate a lot of borscht at the orphanage.
Unfortunately, the borscht they served was nothing like the borscht I
love today. All I had to do was glance at my plate, and my gut would
twist, clamoring to get away from the table and what it knew was
coming. It was something no child should endure. Still, I knew I must
leave my plate clean and my teachers satisfied if I wanted to go with
the other orphans to a movie.
I’ve always been a person who believed I could have it both ways. So,
I often used cunning tricks to make my teachers happy while saving
my stomach from sure sickness. After eating all the potatoes, beans,
and carrots floating in the broth, I would drink the juice. That was the
easy part. I loved vegetables, well, most of the time anyway. When it
came to the clumsily chopped pieces of boiled onions floating at the
bottom of my bowl, I couldn’t eat it. They looked too much like the
chunks of fat sitting next to them for me to want to taste them. So,
they usually went with the fat to whatever creative way I could find to
dispose of them. I used as many different ideas as I could create, but
not on Sunday. The rules changed on Sunday.
Regardless of my wit and determination, they often discovered my
little crimes. A pile of onion leftovers under my seat at the dining
table or a balled-up rag next to my bed were enough to give me away.
Sometimes I would get away with my tricks, but they caught me
enough that I knew I couldn’t take that risk on Sunday. I didn’t want
to be grounded, beaten, or yelled at today, not when Chernivtsi was
waiting for me. So, I swallowed every piece of boiled onion on my
73

VITALY
plate, stealing my will to prevent myself from throwing up.
After swallowing the last onion, I jumped from my seat and ran to
the foyer, where I knew they would line us up by twos for the walk
from the orphanage to the city’s hub. I couldn’t wait for the dimmed
lights of the comfy theater, knowing there would be no more work to
do and with ice cream too. It was perfection in its purest form.
Slavik was as excited to go to the movie as I was. So, he rushed out
behind me. We ended up standing together at the front of the line. As
we stood waiting for the other children, I couldn’t stop thinking of
the icy-sweet aroma of frozen delight and how it might wash away
the taste of the borscht we had for lunch. I thought of it as we walked
side by side down the streets of Chernivtsi and waited together while
our educators found seats for us in the local theater’s small projection
room.
“It would be so much better to have ice cream first,” he sighed as
the teacher guided us to where we would sit.
I agreed but didn’t say anything. My thoughts had already adjusted
to the theater’s dimming lights. We were about to watch “Sadko,”
an adventurous movie made long before I was born. The film’s hero
longed to bring joy and peace to the ones he loved as he searched for
the bird of happiness, and he was willing to fight anyone who stood in
his way. I felt like I was fighting with him. I wondered where that bird
resided and if I would ever find it. Maybe there was one waiting for
me outside the orphanage or even outside Chernivtsi. I didn’t know,
but I would fight for it every day of my life, the way he did,
After almost two hours of the positive tension caused by Sadko’s
rises and falls, we went for ice cream. I would always eat mine with
great attention, anxiously rushing to collect the drips forming on the
edge of the cone. It took all my focus to catch each one as we made
our way back to the orphanage. I often thought of what it must be like
to gaze at this little group of children from some window high above,
74

BOTSYA’S MOTHER
eating their ice cream as they buzzed around the city lined up two
by two. Of course, they didn’t always need to be from the apartment
windows. It could be from any house, from any building, from any
window. It didn’t matter to me, as long as there was a place I might
one day call my “home.”
Since that wasn’t up to me, I would often sense the helplessness
slowly climbing toward my throat, choking me in despair and sorrow.
I would look around and see a couple, mom and dad, walking with
their children. Mothers would hold little hands tightly whilechildren’s
free hands were getting busy with pastries, ice creams, and candy. I
imagined they were on their way to the park or home. Of course, I
didn’t know where they were heading, but wherever they went, I knew
they were never alone, hugging their pillows or crying themselves to
sleep. I tried to make the sorrow leave my chest, but I suppose it was
too comfortable, as it usually decided to stay.
Today’s walk wasn’t as bad as most. I had impressions from the
movie, memories from our camp, and the surprisingly comfortable
noise of cars passing along the road to entertain me. We were in front
of our building in no time, embraced by the flowers and greenhouse
telling us we were near the familiar comforts of a place I felt tempted
to call home. I tried to feel welcomed when I arrived and nostalgic
when I left, but I just couldn’t. Every association of our little haven on
Fastivska Street always brought me back to the point where I had to
think about why I was there.
The sound of forks, knives, and clinging plates was there to meet our
little group, followed by the scent of some kind of meat announcing
it was getting close to dinner time. We were barely in the door, and
already it was time to get back to our schedule.
Slavik and I prepared quickly, and then, we sat at the window
together to watch the people going about their lives. We were excited
to see someone new and think about what they were doing, where
75

VITALY
they were going, and how it felt to live outside the orphanage walls.
After almost half an hour of interpreting the movie and going through
the scenes we saw, I told Slavik about the thoughts I had during our
walks. I wondered if the people outside ever imagined children at
the window of the orphanage, watching them, but there was no one
around tonight, not even a passerby. It seemed our little community
was too far outside the city to have many people walking by it.
We watched for as long as possible, but it was soon dinner time.
So Slavik got up and prepared for dinner. I lingered at the window;
my thoughts lost in the image of boys and girls hanging from their
father’s neck as he came home from his work. He was so happy to
see them and overwhelmed with joy by the sight of his family. I could
see him approaching his wife. She would be smiling, receiving a kiss,
gently placed on top of her head, where it would affectionately mingle
with the scent of apple pies. They would later sit at the big oak table,
sharing baked chicken, crispy sweet potatoes, freshly chopped salad,
and cake she had prepared.
I turned to share my dream with Slavik, but looking around, I
realized everyone had already left for dinner. The room was empty,
filled only with the ache of loneliness I felt reflected by the barren
street.
The following morning, as we were finishing the milk and buck-
wheat porridge we had for breakfast, we heard a female’s screams
breaking through the hall. Her raised voice bounced off the walls,
ping-ponging through the empty corridors until it landed in Slavik’s
lap. I tried not to look at him as he began to sink under the table. We
all knew it was his mother.
Slavik pretended to be searching for something at his feet. He
seemed embarrassed, but at the same time, you could see the relief
on his face, as he knew his mother had come to pick him up, at least
for a day. Regardless of the time or meal schedules, she was coming
76

BOTSYA’S MOTHER
for him, always yelling and screaming down the hallway, occasionally
berating the orphanage staff.
I looked under the table, trying to catch Slavik’s eyes. “You’d better
go now, Botsya.”
He stood up, rushing towards the exit, as she appeared at the doors,
wrapped in grotesque darkness and the echo of her reckless screams.
Botsya gave me a restrained wave as he nearly dragged his mother
through the cafeteria door.
I knew that Slavik would come back with candy, ice cream, and all
sorts of sweets that he would selflessly share with all of us, but that
didn’t matter much. I was glad that he had a chance to spend at least
a couple of hours with the woman who gave him life. He could gather
pieces of her to store in his memory and recall later in the swirl of
endless nights and dreams. Even if everyone said she was loud and
unbearable, at least she was there.
While Slavik was still out with his mother, probably enjoying all
sorts of delights, we had to take some time to go with one of our
educators to the greenhouse. Besides learning how to knit, sew,
sing, write, iron, and wash our clothes, we also had to learn how
to take care of the vegetables, flowers, and fruits we grew in the
backyard. Although many would consider these tasks too challenging
for children, I enjoyed planting flowers, clearing weeds, and picking
pears and apples. I liked learning how to take care of the fruits and
vegetables we later used to make meals. The smell of the freshly dug
soil and fertilizers returned me to my simple pleasures, teaching me
what it meant to be in touch with the earth that nurtures us.
Ludwig Viktorovych - one of our educators - showed us how to
prune the roses. He also taught us how soil should be plowed and dug
for the next planting. I was surprised by how empty my mind could be
while working with soil. It was like working on a new invention. So,
maintaining the garden soon became one of my favorite chores.
77

VITALY
I came back to the dorm, all covered in soil and dust, with my face as
calm as a monk in silent prayer when I spotted Slavik. He was smiling
above a pile of candy he had spread across my bed. He moved aside,
making a spot where I could sit, showing me that he meant to share
the collection between us. My face lit up with a smile as I came to
sit next to him, almost feeling embarrassed to open one of the sweet
treats.
“Dig in!” Slavik said with a welcoming smile spread across his face.
Then, he jumped from the bed, “I’ll be back. I’m going to find Masha.
I bet she will faint once she sees this.”
He was off rushing to get Masha and left me to observe the pile of
candy. I couldn’t help but think of what our lives would be like if we
had never met each other. We would have never become friends if
we weren’t alone and parentless. Of course, it didn’t make being an
orphan better, but I was grateful to have a friend like Slavik in my life.
I picked one chocolate out from the pile and started unwrapping
it with odd attentiveness like it might disappear once the wrapping
came off. My fear disappeared when Slavik returned with Masha. Her
amazingly bright face, framed with chestnut hair, lit up. She looked
at the pile, stunned and full of joy.
Sitting next to me, shyly smirking, she asked Slavik, “Where did
you get this?”
“My mother bought them for me,” the word mother seemed to catch
in his throat.
We didn’t ask anything else. We sat on my bed enjoying the candy
while watching the cars driving on Fastivska Street, “When I grow up,
I think I’ll drive a Mazda, black with leather seats,” Slavik said as we
watched one pass.
“I don’t know. I would be a Honda for sure if I could be a car. Honda
is faster, so I think it would beat Mazda without question,” I replied.
“But a Mercedes would beat a Honda. So I would be a Mercedes.”
78

BOTSYA’S MOTHER
“Well, I don’t think so…. Maybe it could, but if I was the one driving
it, no one would beat me,” I said with finality though I knew the
argument continued in both our minds.
Whoever came in was invited to join our little sweet-eating quest,
their faces blooming with a sugar buzz floating above our heads. We
ended our adventure with not a single candy left. Our stomachs were
full of happiness, leaving everyone in the mood to play, chat, whisper,
and sing. We were drunk with joy that rarely came to our orphanage
door.
When they announced supper, only a few of us were still able to open
our mouths, let alone swallow the food they gave us. The teachers
circled us like vultures, checking the contents on our plates.
We all put forth our best effort, knowing that detention was lurking
if we didn’t find a way to finish. I was looking at my sandwich with
thoughts of having time to build something from the engine I buried. I
wanted time to work on it, which I wouldn’t have during punishment.
So, I decided to avoid trouble. Unfortunately, some of my friends
weren’t as motivated as I was, so I could hear threats and unpleasant
pokes, implying detention and consequences. The worst punishment
you could get was being beaten with the wooden ruler across your
palms and fingers or beaten with a belt or wooden stick, which was
usually the form of detention I was getting.
I couldn’t help myself not to scream when they were punishing me. I
liked to think it was to annoy my punisher or rebel against that system,
but it was more likely because I was frightened and wanted someone
to save me. So I screamed, choosing the highest pitch I could get, often
being bullied by the older kids or laughed at for “screaming like a girl.”
The only one who stood up for me was Slavik. Somehow you always
find someone to patch you up and stick with you, regardless of the
challenging things around you. I guess no one should be alone in this
world.
79

VITALY
I didn’t want to face anything that had to do with punishment, so
I remained silent, and I ate. In the end, most of us did, so the living
room was filled with dozens of children, fighting to find the best spot
to watch the long-awaited television show, “Good Night, Children!”
The opening song started, and most of us sang along with words well
memorized. We matched every pause before seeing the little puppet
bear and bunny talking to each other happily. We loved watching the
opening credits, observing the moon and the stars made of colored
clay, turning into different shapes, and changing colors in a blink.
We watched the bear singing, dancing, and telling fairy tales with
lyrics while bunny and other puppet animals were having all sorts of
goodnight adventures, summoning dreams in our sleepy little heads.
Our brains welcomed the enticing invitation to dream but battled it
too, wanting to stay up and watch the show.
As the sun left the sky, we surrendered to the darkening night.
Though the sugar buzz was still whirling in my head, the intensely
sweet burden of a busy day finally fell on my eyes, making me sleepy
and hungry for hugs. I dove into my bed, hugging my pillow, and let
the sheets take over my muscles. With my arms wrapped around the
most consistent form of comfort I knew, I fell deep in dreams, silently
lurking around my bed, waiting for me to live them.
The wind was whipping my face, but it wasn’t cold. I was high above
the ground, but I wasn’t afraid. I was flying, able to touch the warm
summer raindrops as they reflected thousands of miniature rainbows
across the clouds. Everything; the sky, the wind, the eiderdown clouds,
and the rainbows were all mine.
In my dreams, I was free, and I knew one day my life would be free
as well. It would be full of the joy I knew I deserved to have.
80

12
Loved Ones Lost
Cemetery in Chernivtsi where people I loved and cared about during my
childhood are now buried.
D
URING MY CHILDHOOD, the winters I experienced were
harsh and biting cold. Wind from snowstorms rocked our
building, and we lived daily without the necessities to keep
warm. Even when we were inside, I would sometimes wear a hat,
81

VITALY
gloves, and a scarf around my mouth.
Unfortunately, the scarf
wasn’t wide enough to cover my nose. So the steam from my mouth
transformed moisture from my nose into tiny icicles. Between that
and frightening snowstorms, living at the orphanage seemed like a
constant fight for survival.
As I think about growing up in Chernivtsi, I remember everything as
dull and gray. I spent so much of my childhood surrounded by people
fighting for something. The soldiers were trying to end a war and ease
the suffering of strangers while their mothers, sisters, and wives were
humiliatingly fighting over pickled vegetables and sausages in cans
any time some lucky seller had a chance to stock a shelf. The city was
saturated with the signs of unfortunate stomachs, trodding through
the barren shelves of almost empty markets.
Ladies cherished their plastic shopping bags, taping every hole
with care and devotion like they might be expensive crocodile purses.
The sparsely stocked shelves offered little variety, filled only with
pasta, bread, and a meager supply of Hungarian pickles and preserves.
Nervous, disappointed people often passed by the markets, hoping for
the day when they might have more options. The lucky buyers who
carried rare oranges or links or any other fruit or meat in their mesh
bags were accosted in the street with desperate questions, asking,
“Where did you get that?”
We found some peace being children, partially protected from the
more worldly concerns occurring at the time. We didn’t understand
war. Beyond the fairy tales and stories starring our favorite heroes,
we focused on enlarging our gum wrapper collections. When we
had duplicates, we would find a way to trade. We even went so far
as stealing wrappers from each other when someone had one we
couldn’t help wanting. Our desire to have the most extensive collection
determined our battlefronts, making everyone who had less envious
of our treasure. Maybe the people who started the wars weren’t
82

LOVED ONES LOST
that different from us. Perhaps they too wanted to have the most
of something, but we didn’t understand what real war was, the depths
of what people suffered while we were battling over worthless scraps
of paper.
Even years after the battles ended, whispers filled the room every
time anyone mentioned the conflicts. As orphans, we heard of the
horrible conditions of war only after small companies of our troops
began coming home, never to be the same after the things they
experienced.
“What is the cause of war?” our teacher asked, writing the title of
his topic on the blackboard. “Our subject for today will be ‘Hot spots
on Earth.’ So, why do we talk about wars, even when everything is
over?”
The class was quiet, solemnly looking at one another. Some were
curious and puzzled, not understanding the subject. The rest of us
were waiting impatiently to hear what our teacher had to say about
the still delicate subject of war.
He mentioned Bosnia, Kosovo, Tajikistan, Dagestan, South Ossetia,
and Chechnya, posting red pins across the world map. He then pressed
one into a place named Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, as the
center of our class’ focus today. We didn’t realize that these places,
which represented only red dots to us, were, in fact, communities that
suffered horror, pain, distress, and losses no one could retrieve.
“Whenever there is a country where war is raging, our country
always jumps in, bringing aid and trying to extinguish the fire of
unreason. That is the scenario happening in Afghanistan since 1979.
“Does anyone know what kind of country Afghanistan is?” the
teacher asked, looking around the classroom as if he was expecting
one of us to answer his question. Though some of us probably knew at
least something about Afghanistan, we remained silent, letting him
fill the room with his words again.
83

VITALY
He continued, giving us essential information, “Afghanistan is a
country of amazing and unique beauty, with great strategic value on
the Silk Road that traverses Central and Southern Asia. The religion is
Islamic, as other religions are almost unacceptable there.”
He told us about the unique beauties and acts of hospitality, like
the tea you could get as a token of appreciation if you ever visited
Afghanistan. Yet, I couldn’t help thinking about how many places of
natural beauty were spoiled by blood and death—crippling, mentally
disturbing, wounding, killing, and scarring them for life.
I sat thinking about all of the horrible things happening in
Afghanistan. I wanted to help the people there. I didn’t want them to
suffer, but I didn’t know what to do. I was feeling helpless. I did not
even have everything I needed to help myself.
“Vitaly!” The teacher’s voice was like a hard jolt, jerking me back to
Fastivska Street. “Vitaly. Come out of your daydreams and take these
books to the principal for me.”
I stood, pulling my mind from the events of Afghanistan back into
my little life. I took the stack of books from my instructor and entered
the orphanage’s nearly silent hallway. I wished I could stay in the
halls sometimes while everyone else was in class. There was so much
I could investigate there.
Every step I took was as slow as I could make it. I wanted to take
advantage of every second of being away from class. My adventure
was almost perfect until I reached the office. What I saw there ruined
everything.
Two of my favorite friends, Nadija and Rostik—twin brother and
sister—were standing with several other children just inside the
orphanage doors. There were seven children in all; four from the
orphanage and three I didn’t recognize.
My friends stood with the small group.
Their coats and other
belongings rested on the floor next to them. I knew what that meant.
84

LOVED ONES LOST
They were leaving the orphanage. They had a family. Unlike most
days, we weren’t receiving three new members to our little family.
Instead, we were losing four, and none of them were me.
Strong emotions stirred in me. I was excited for my friends, and I
was jealous too. I’d seen it before, and it always set my heart racing.
Families sometimes came in to adopt foster children. I hated it. I
didn’t like losing my friends. I wanted to hate them for going away,
and I resented those who took them for not taking me. I was jealous
and angry, but I was happy for them too. Finally, they would be with a
family, something every one of us wanted for ourselves, and for each
other too. Still, I couldn’t get away from my jealousy. What made this
family choose them and not me? Why did they get to go?
Rostik looked at me nervously. Everything we dream about, and still,
he couldn’t trust it. His expression made it worse. Why would he be
nervous? He didn’t understand what he was getting, but I did. He and
his sister had a loving family now, a place to call home. They get to be
that kid I saw holding an ice cream in one hand and his mother’s loving
embrace in the other. They get to sit at the window, watching the little
orphans lined up and walking to the movies. They get a family, but
all I got was one less chance and someone taking another piece of my
family away.
I watched as Vasyl Ivanovych, the principal, helped them with the
last of their few belongings. I didn’t even care that he saw me just
standing alone in the middle of the hall. It was painful to watch them
go. I wanted to be excited for them, but I couldn’t. I wished I could just
run back to my pillow because, more than anything else, I felt alone.
All I could feel now was the empty corridor around me. What if all
the children found families? What if everyone was gone, and I was the
only one left? Or worse, what if I were to go and Slavik or Igor were the
ones left standing alone in this hall, watching me go? I wondered if
this was how the people in Afghanistan felt, standing over the remains
85

VITALY
of their destroyed dreams. How are we supposed to be happy with a
world full of so many horrible things? Even the little blessings like
Nadija and Rostik getting a new home hurt somebody like me. If I got
what I wanted, who would I hurt? I wondered.
The worst of my feelings came when my mind quickly answered the
question. I didn’t care. I couldn’t stop wishing that one day I would
be with a family, no matter who it hurt.
86

13
Chernobyl
On April 26, 1986, one of the worst accidents in the history of nuclear
energy occurred,
which greatly contributed to the collapse of the USSR. Scientists say
Pripyat will remain
uninhabitable for another 100,000 years.
87

VITALY
I
T WAS EARLY IN THE DAY, and I was still not awake when one
of our instructors came to the door of our room saying, “Pack all
the clothes you can’t use anymore. If it’s too small or too torn,
put it in this box.”
I remembered Nadija and Rostik standing next to all of their be-
longings and wondered what might be happening to us, “Why are we
packing our stuff?”
My instructor looked at me with a sad expression on her face. “We
are gathering clothes to give them away. A disaster has created an
unfortunate circumstance not far from us. So, we are gathering what
we don’t need to help them.”
With that, she walked away. We didn’t know who would get the
clothes or why someone would need them. We didn’t know that we
were collecting clothes for victims of an earthquake in Armenia until
later. We only knew that something terrible had happened and that
many people needed all the help they could get. The thing I realized
was that it could always get worse. I didn’t have much, but it was
enough that I could give to someone else. I was grateful. Our little
orphanage often protected us from nature’s brutal twists and from
finding out firsthand how cruel the world around us could be.
I was standing in a room full of other boys, but we had shelter, food,
and enough clothes to share. Unfortunately, there was no electricity to
shine upon the screams that echoed through the city or aid the search
for lost children and missing people in Armenia. Only the ambulance’s
red and blue lights illuminated the broken concrete and fallen bricks.
The wounded, the screaming, and lost, that was a picture hidden
from us, a thing we never had to experience. However, as Pioneers,
we were called to unite and help, parentless or not. Still, the best
we could do was to collect the clothes we didn’t use—there weren’t
many—and give them away to the children in Armenia. As we had an
idea of what was going on in the Soviet Union at the time, I was sad
88

CHERNOBYL
and disappointed that I couldn’t do much for those children because I
knew that I would have wanted someone to help me if I needed it. Still,
I was at peace because I knew other Pioneers had more and gave more.
When we arrived at class that day, our teacher looked distracted
from the lessons. She was usually standing and ready to teach us, but
today she was sitting on the front edge of her desk, gently guiding us
to sit in our chairs. A man sat behind her. He was missing a patch of
hair over his left ear and had red splotches across the side of his face.
His scars scared me. I had never seen someone like him before, and
I wondered if he was one of the soldiers returning from the war. The
image of his face stuck in my mind, often returning in my dreams,
making me wonder about how bad things could get.
When our instructor began to speak, it was with a solemn voice,
“Tragedy poured itself upon dozens of towns in Armenia today.
Thousands of people were injured, and many were dead or lost. But I
don’t want to speak with you about the devastation. I want to talk to
you about hope. Armenia will rise from its ashes and broken bricks
one day. We all do. Life goes on without waiting.”
I listened to her and thought of how I had suffered, abandoned at
an orphanage. Maybe the disasters caused us to meet others who
suffered and find a way to unite in our search for happiness. All of us
were parentless and alone in some way.
Our educators and teachers were giving their best to protect us
from the world’s cruelties while simultaneously preparing us to be
independent and compassionate. So, I was happy to gather everything
I could and give it to Armenia. I didn’t think old clothes consoled
anyone in those times, but, unfortunately, that was the best we could
do for the people suffering there.
Our instructor continued, pulling me from my thoughts of Armenia.
“There was another disaster that destroyed many lives in Ukraine just
a couple of years ago. It devastated surrounding countries, and it will
89

VITALY
still affect those cities and their people generations from now.
“Chernobyl was one of the USSR’s most advanced and influential
industrial centers. Then, on April 26, 1986, one of the most signifi-
cant radioactive explosions of a nuclear plant ever happened there,
changing millions of lives worldwide.
“It took just one day to destroy a nearly twenty-mile radius around
the ruined power plant. They evacuated almost a quarter of a million
people overall, leaving behind lives the people there had worked
decades to build. The people of Chernobyl lost their towns and villages,
families, friends, homes, co-workers, businesses, their entire lives.
They suffered devastating illnesses from radiation and lost all their
possessions. People continue to share their grief and memories today
and will for decades to come.
“Today, I have invited an important guest to our classroom. His
name is Oleg Ivanovich, and he was working at the power plant the
night it exploded. I have invited him here to share his story with us
and imprint the memories of that event in your young minds. When
we can learn from tragedies like these, we can be careful to make sure
they do not happen again.”
Oleg began, “My parents moved to Pripyat in 1979. When I became
a man, I served in the Pacific Fleet on a submarine. After my service, I
moved to Pripyat, got married, and then my two beautiful daughters
were born. At the time of the accident, we were building the fourth
block of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant. We had just started the
construction stage.
“My family loved Pripyat. Even after leaving it, we grieved about
the place we lost. The city sat on the bank of the Pripyat River. Even
though it was young and modern, it was also woodland with beautiful
scenery. Although we lived in a city, we truly enjoyed all the village-
like charms of something that looked more like a small town.”
I listened to Oleg and thought of our summer camp and imagined
90

CHERNOBYL
Pripyat must be full of fields of wildflowers too.
“On the day of the accident, I went to work at 4 p.m. I worked two
shifts in a row that day, my regular shift and one for a friend, who
asked me to substitute for him. My second shift began at midnight. A
senior operator named Anatoly Kurgur worked the second shift with
me.
“Everything seemed to happen at once. I knew they were running
tests on the unit, and the reactor power was failing. So, they asked us
to evacuate the area. I didn’t think much of it then. We had situations
before. Still, we knew the safety protocol. So, we didn’t stay in the
central hall of the reactor. It was a good thing too. I found out later. If
we had been there much longer, we would not have survived.
“In a security room, there was a walk-in closet made of brick. I went
inside to pick up something for the evacuation, and a few seconds
later, I heard an explosion. Imagine that. This tiny closet had just
saved me and kept me alive. Everything around me was shaking, and I
could hear the reactor hissing. Then, it all began to crumble. I pinched
myself. I didn’t know if I was still alive or if it was all just a terrible
dream. It seemed so unreal.
“The air was sweltering around us, making it hard to breathe, but
there was no fear among the workers or the administration. Everyone
was calmly doing what we were trained to do. The fear didn’t come
until later after the second explosion happened. The whole place
rocked.
“I fell to the floor, but breathing was easier on the floor than it was
when I was standing, so I stayed there, not knowing what to do next.
Then, I heard my co-worker, Anatoly scream in pain. I looked in the
direction of the scream and could see him crawling toward me. Every
motion looked like agony, ‘I think we got hit hard,’ he said.
“Anatoly had more experience than me, so I knew we had to get out
right away. But I wasn’t sure which way to go. It was so dark around us
91

VITALY
that we couldn’t see much beyond each other. We felt our way through
familiar rooms, but every path we tried had piles of fallen concrete.
We couldn’t even access the stairs. So we decided to make our way to
the emergency ladder. On the way to the ladder, I found a flashlight
in an emergency bin, which helped me see things around me a little
better, including my partner. I was horrified. Anatoly had almost no
skin left on the back of his hands. I guess he must have been out in the
main room when the explosion happened and used them to cover his
face.
“When we finally found our way out of the building, he was taken
away in an ambulance. Along with the other nuclear plant operators,
I returned dirty and wet to the administrative building. I washed
with the special powder we kept on sight and changed my clothes the
moment I got there.
“Most of the workers in our area had already gathered whenI arrived.
We also had operators from the third block, and we talked about what
happened. We knew we had a job to do. So, we didn’t panic, although
in our hearts, maybe some of us were scared.”
Oleg paused for a moment, gathering his emotions before he con-
tinued to tell his story, “We made it out, but we still didn’t understand
the real danger yet. People were walking around, examining chunks of
graphite they found on the streets. We were still in the office planning
as a glowing column rose from the mouth of the reactor. I just stared.
It was beautiful in a way, like the northern lights.
“You know, this may sound strange, but at that moment, it hit me.
Everyone said the reactor was destroyed, but I suddenly understood
what that meant and thought about my family. I thought about the
entire city. Our children, families, and sixty thousand people slept only
three kilometers away. They had no idea of what had just happened.
“We all stood, staring at the scene in front of us, not sure what would
happen next. We knew it was necessary to make a quick decision, act,
92

CHERNOBYL
and fulfill our duties as parents and workers, but I don’t think we knew
what to do. What could we do?
“Things were bad, but even then, no one understood the full scale
of the disaster. The deputy chief engineer told us, ‘Okay guys, there
has been an accident, albeit a serious one, but I don’t want you to
worry. We’ve made plans for this. First, they will send us to Moscow
for medical treatment. Then we will return.’ He didn’t know that
many were already on their way to Moscow to die.
“They took the people with the worst injuries first, while the rest
of us stayed behind to try and stop more disasters. But, as the night
progressed, I was getting worse. So they put me in an ambulance to
take me in for treatment, as well.
“Later, in the Moscow clinic, it turned out that eighty percent of
my body was burned, but Anatoly had received more burns than me. I
think I was saved by changing my clothes and washing when I got to
the admin building.
“It was over a day and a half before they warned local inhabitants
that it was necessary to close the vents, go out less, and carry iodine
tablets. Before that, the people passed the news through word of
mouth. Some women thought it was better not to let the children go
to the sandbox. Still, they didn’t know the severity of the situation,
so many children continued to play outside. It was a day off for many
people, so the city lived like things were every day. People gathered to
continue celebrating their life events, even though the military wore
respirators as they walked along the streets.
“At the time of the accident, I already had two children; one girl was
ten months old, the other girl was two months. When my wife heard
about the disaster from our neighbors, she gathered the children and
tried to leave for a nearby village, but people were leaving that village,
as well. As a result, her father drove her to the Gomel region. They
ended up going to my aunt’s in Minsk, but before they could see my
93

VITALY
aunt, everyone had to be examined. When they arrived at the hospital,
the staff took their clothes, giving them clean garments. After that,
they had thorough exams and blood tests.
“I spent days in the hospital unable to move or eat. None of us had
any appetite, and in my case, I ended up witha bone marrowtransplant.
It was excruciating, but the worst part was that I could not see my wife
and children when I was in the hospital. While I was fighting for my
life in the hospital, my elder brother took care of my family. Thanks
to him, we all survived.
“On the twenty-seventh of April, a radio broadcast finally went out
in Pripyat, announcing the evacuation, ‘You are leaving for three days,
take the minimum number of things,’ they said. They evacuated the
young first but did not tell the elderly to respond in one way or another.
Some of us knew what was going on, but no one explained what would
happen next. The people of Chernobyl and its neighboring cities faced
an uncertain future, and all they had were bits of unclear information.
“Although she had left earlier, my wife took nothing. Our docu-
ments, gold jewelry, children’s toys, clothes, and other valuables
remained in Pripyat. We thought we would be back. So, they didn’t
take any food, canned goods, toys, or expensive things. Besides the
clothes on their back, my wife’s only thought was diapers for the baby.
“After a few days in Minsk, my wife and both of our little daughters
went to the sanatorium of Slavinsk in the Donetsk region because they
managed to get a ticket from the station’s trade union committee. I
met them there six months later. I didn’t work after that because I
was now disabled from my radiation exposure. So, we lived on those
benefits.”
“The doctors later told me, depending on the regions of Pripyat,
people were exposed to as much as fifty to seventy REM of radiation.
Five REM is considered the maximum exposure anyone should expe-
rience in a year. Still, even with their high exposure, the conditions
94

CHERNOBYL
were survivable with treatment for most people. For others - who
were exposed to over a hundred REM or higher - they were diagnosed
with acute radiation sickness, rated as first-degree. Many of them
would not make it.
“Now, years later, we know it is unlikely that your generation and
even your children will be able to live in Pripyat’s beautiful city. One
bad moment and our lives are changed forever.”
I couldn’t imagine everything he had gone through. It sounded
excruciating, and I could see he was suffering as he finished his
story. We probably didn’t need to know those details as children. We
couldn’t understand what happened, but we couldn’t avoid it either. I
remembered sitting in front of the television with my attention caught
by colorfully drawn characters of a cartoon that showed the suffering
of a family from Chernobyl. The father grabbed hair falling from his
head. His son was watching him. The boy’s mother passed away,
and they were left to live alone and face an unknown future. The
cartoon was graphic, and we were missing the complete picture of
chaos, disaster, and lost lives that Oleg had endured. We only knew a
small piece of the story. Still, we knew disaster happened not far from
our own homes.
As I grew older, I heard similar stories of the terrible impact the
Chernobyl disaster made on the lives of many people who went
through these sufferings. They mobilized thousands of people, but
many had already suffered graver consequences than losing all of
their hair. Every time I met with a survivor, their stories awoke my
childhood memories of Oleg and his family. Even today, I can’t help
but think of the disaster and what happened there. The world moves
on for most of us, but for some, their tragedies consume them.
I learned a lot from the horrible things that could happen in the
world. Still, I knew, like my teacher said, life goes on. So, no matter
how many disasters I had in my life, I had to let them go. I could not
95

VITALY
let the tragedies consume me.
96

14
Pan Kotsky
Pan Kotsky fairy tale book cover
H
ORRIBLE THINGS WERE happening in the world around
Chernivtsi. Our people suffered almost ten years of pain,
war, and loss, trying to make things right somehow. If I
had understood what was happening in the world outside our little
orphanage, I would have been more grateful for the simple things I had
97

VITALY
and maybe forgotten the circumstances that brought me there. But
it is often difficult to see beyond our suffering, to understand others’
pain. We notice what we don’t have, and maybe we should. Perhaps
our pain isn’t so bad if it makes us want something better than what
life gave us.
Horrible things were happening in the world around Chernivtsi. Our
people suffered almost ten years of pain, war, and loss, trying to make
things right somehow. If I had understood what was happening in the
world outside our little orphanage, I would have been more grateful for
the simple things I had and maybe forgotten the circumstances that
brought me there. But it is often difficult to see beyond our suffering,
to understand others’ pain. We notice what we don’t have, and maybe
we should. Perhaps our pain isn’t so bad if it makes us want something
better than what life gave us.
We learned to want more as orphans. Every night, we would read a
different story to tickle our imagination and sweeten our dreams. The
exciting tales showed us more to the world than just our little lives.
Our senses became excited every time we heard the words, “Once
upon a time….” We would all listen carefully, longing for the rest of
the sentence, “…ina land far away….” I always wondered how far that
land was and how you could get there, desperately hoping there might
be room for one more person.
My imagination ran wild, flowing into the story, creating magical
realities and fantastic worlds where anything was possible and where
good always won. I loved hearing the news of what would happen
next for little children like me. “…There was a little girl named Little
Red Riding Hood. She was very kind, and everyone knew her name
because she was easily recognized with her red hood bobbing through
the forest.”
Even though I already knew what was coming next, I was always
held in curious anticipation, waiting for the Big Bad Wolf to come.
98

PAN KOTSKY
Yet, at the same time, I was frightened but peaceful, knowing that no
matter what, someone would save the day, and the fairy tale would
end with, “and they all lived happily ever after.”
Even in real life, I hoped that someone would save the day every
time I was in bad situations with potentially harmful endings. Usually,
I was the one to protect myself, at least in most of my disasters. Who
knows? Maybe everyone is too busy to save each other, or perhaps the
world is full of too many people. That’s how it was at our orphanage.
There were so many children. No one could focus on just one. So, I felt
lonely most of the time.
Still, I believed in miracles and wonders, hoping for the best.
I wondered how it would feel if I were one of the lead fairy tale
characters, blindly traveling towards my happy ending. The stories
gave me brief moments to hope for the best during the day, occupying
my brain until bedtime arrived. Then, I would inevitably come back
to my pillow, twitching and clawing, trying to find my consolation.
Sometimes I found it in my dreams, but I also returned to the fairy
tales for peace when I was restless.
One of my favorite tales was Pan Kotsky. It was a story about a very
persuasive and rather fat cat. “Once upon a time,” the teacher began,
“there was a humble old man who had his best friend cat who proudly
wore the name Pan Kotsky. They were the best of companions until
their happiness came to an end. The cat was getting fatter and fatter,
and his owner didn’t have enough food to feed him. Pan became so
lazy he wouldn’t catch mice, so the house was swarming with those
annoying little critters. Finally, with nothing else to do, the old man
put Pan Kotsky in a bag and carried him to the forest, leaving him far
enough away he couldn’t come back. The old man was sad and lost
all of his joy, but the cat was so useless and lazy, and with the lack of
food on top of everything, he just had to leave him.”
At that point, I was always confused about whether I should feel
99

VITALY
sorry for the old man or sympathize with the cat. Still, even though
the cat was in an unenviable situation, luck was on his side. Others
accepted the image he created of himself, and he experienced a string
of fortunate opportunities. Pan Kotsky even married a fox, who was
on his side, claiming he was the fiercest animal in all Ukraine.
The thought that everyone should have one fox beside them struck
me. I always thought about how lucky Pan Kotsky was. Though he was
a little too proud and pompous, he was an adventurous cat. I knew that
I could rest with peace in my heart, knowing that Pan Kotsky would
find his fortune, even facing unfortunate conditions.
Little Fox saw him alone in the forest, saying, “Well, you are beautiful!
Your tale is so magnificent! What kind of animal are you?”
Pan Kotsky replied, puffed up in glory and self-esteem, “Don’t tell me,
Little Fox, that you have never heard of Pan Kotsky! I am the fiercest and
most famous animal in the entire forest!”
The fox was impressed, instantly falling in love with the vain cat. “Oh,
please, Pan Kotsky, would you come to my house and protect me? I am so
small and helpless. I would love to have someone like you by my side!”
Pan Kotsky accepted and went to live with the Little Fox. She went out
every day searching for food to feed her beloved fat cat. She gathered the
food and prepared the meals, so Pan Kotsky didn’t even need to raise his
tale.
One day, as the fox searched for food to feed her gentleman cat, she ran
into Mr. Rabbit. Mr. Rabbit approached, “Little Fox,” the rabbit started, “I
was thinking about you, wondering if I could come to see you soon.”
Little fox said, “Sorry, Mr. Rabbit, but I already have my gentleman, the
fiercest and the most famous animal in all the forests!”
Later, she ran into Mr. Boar, and he also asked, “Hello, Little Fox! Can I
come to court you later? I was thinking about how beautiful you are.”
“No, thank you, Mr. Boar! I already have a gentleman! Pan Kotsky is
100

PAN KOTSKY
the fiercest and the most famous animal in the entire forest!”
Not long after, the fox met Mr. Bear, “Hello, Little Fox! You are so
beautiful! Would you care to accept a gentleman like myself?”
The fox replied for the third time, “No, thank you, Mr. Bear. I already
have a gentleman! His name is Pan Kotsky, and he is the fiercest and the
most famous animal in the entire forest!”
Mr. Rabbit, Mr. Bear, and Mr. Boar gathered later to discuss this Pan
Kotsky. “I think we should call Little Fox and her gentlemen to dinner and
see if that Pan Kotsky is who Little Fox says he is.”
They all agreed, sending Mr. Rabbit out to call on them. “Dear Little Fox,
would you come to dinner with your gentleman Pan Kotsky?”
Little fox agreed and began getting ready to go, so proud to have them
meet her gentleman.
When the fox and cat arrived at the dinner, there was no one at the table,
for Mr. Rabbit was hiding in bushes, Mr. Boar found his place hiding under
the table, and Mr. Bear had climbed a tree. Without any manners, Pan
Kotsky meowed excitedly and jumped onto the table, devouring everything
in sight. As he roared and made sounds, the animals hiding thought he
was asking for more.
With each growl from Pan Kotsky, they became more and more fright-
ened. Mr. Boar’s tail started trembling, revealing where he was hiding
under the table. Pan Kotsky thought it was a mouse to eat with his dinner,
so he jumped and bit the tail with his sharp little teeth.
Mr. Boar ran, tipping the table and causing Mr. Bear to fall onto Mr.
Rabbit’s back, making the rabbit cry, “Help me! Help!!!”
“Pan Kotsky knocked me out of the tree!” said Mr. Bear trembling.
“He hit me in the back!” said Mr. Rabbit, crying.
“He bit off my tail with his enormous teeth!” said Mr. Boar, still
frightened.
Little Fox noticed that her fierce and famous Pan Kotsky was also
trembling in fear, thinking the other gentlemen wanted to attack him.
101

VITALY
Realizing none of them were there to protect her, she said, “I’ve had
enough of gentlemen!!” and she left, locking her door against any caller.
I loved the story of Pan Kotsky. The moral of the story seemed to be,
“He who talks big doesn’t always act big.” I knew this was true, as I
could think of many people in my life who were a lot like that greedy
cat. They often made big promises they didn’t keep.
I didn’t know how to think of people like Pan Kotsky. Every time I
listened to the story, I found myself wanting him to succeed and fail
at the same time. I was not too fond of the cat’s behavior, but I did
appreciate how things always worked in his favor. I wanted my life to
be like Pan Kotsky’s. Of course, I didn’t want to be fat and lazy, but I
knew I could get what I wanted if I had the same confidence as that
crafty cat. I just had to figure out how to have one without the other.
102

15
The Lord’s Prayer
Many of the Orthodox Churches in Ukraine, favor a Russian style of
architecture.
D
URING THE TIME I WAS GROWING UP in the orphanage,
Ukraine was a place where religion was considered useless.
The only belief system we were allowed to worship was
communism. As children, they taught us to be honorable, hard-
103

VITALY
working adults and that religion would only hold us back. The USSR
focused on scientific facts only, racing to advance technology and
being first above other countries. They believed there was no proof
that God existed, and we should have faith only in what our eyes could
see. “Religion is for unintelligent people!” they said. “God does not
exist, and there is nothing above the human race, except the clouds
and the stars.” They thought we should live our lives usingintelligence
and the pure power of deduction.
The Soviet ideology stated that cultured and enlightened people
could not be believers of religious fancy. Our Government persecuted
churches.
They arrested priests and tore crosses from rooftops,
determined to prohibit and limit all spiritual activity. This mandate
included removing religion from all government activity, including
the public schools. As Soviet citizens, we could sacredly believe only
in the victory of communism. It was a way of life for me.
Still, believers silentlybelieved, practicing their faith privately. They
didn’t talk about their opinions or even go to church, but they believed
in their God. I’ve often felt the teaching of communism wouldn’t have
been so devastating for Christians if only they were allowed to believe
in what they wanted. Someone trusting that Jesus was God would
not harm those who didn’t. Science and spirituality didn’t need to
contrast one another, but that was not the opinion of the Communist
Party.
Eventually, Communist Russia did leave our fair city, and the
consciousness of the Ukrainian Government changed.
As I was
entering the years where I no longer wanted to think of myself
as a little boy, the world around me was also feeling a little more
independent. Communism had left its mark and still had its influence,
but people began believing again, though they did so with caution.
The teachers at my school were not allowed to talk about religion, but
some of the teachers were brave enough to try and introduce us to
104

THE LORD’S PRAYER
Jesus. Martha Ivanivna was my favorite teacher at the orphanage and
the first to unveil ideas about someone out there who loved me that I
could not see or hear.
“Isn’t that the point of religion?” Martha once asked us, “to provide
us with the strength to face challenges we meet along the way. That’s
why it’s called faith.”
Most of our guardians wouldn’t say such a thing. I don’t know if
they had faith in religion, but they always said religion was useless
in our classes, and communism was the only “religion” we needed.
Some of the teachers taught us that faith in Jesus was misleading and
as destructive as Satan to our way of life.
As young minds prone to readily adopting our teachers’ knowledge,
we gave it our faith, following the example of Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov,
better known by his alias Vladimir Lenin. We didn’t know if Jesus was
as horrible as the Bible preached Satan to be, but they said weshouldn’t
trust his teachings. So, we didn’t think that the stories about Jesus
were authentic, and we could not understand why people followed
them. I always supposed that children whose parents were silent
believers could still believe, but we all listened to what our instructors
said at the orphanage, obliging and following their lead. Well, most of
us did, but not everyone.
One night, when it was Martha’s turn to watch over us and take care
that we were all in our beds on time, she came into the room, carefully
checking the hall first to see if there was anyone outside the dorm
doors. Then, she sat on one of the beds and smiled at all of us. I was
excited for our next bedtime story as she carefully drew a book from
underneath her sweater.
Looking toward the door one last time, she asked, “What do you
know about Jesus Christ?”
We were confused by her question. We didn’t know much, only that
he wasn’t a favorite of the communist party. I realized later that rules
105

VITALY
aren’t written by the masses, no matter how progressive they are.
Individuals who rule the people decide what their lives will be.
“Jesus and Satan are evil, and we shouldn’t believe in them,”
someone said from beneath a blanket.
“Jesus is bad,” another voice followed.
“Jesus is not a God,” I followed. I wanted to say more. I had many
opinions about Jesus, but I didn’t want to look stupid, so I didn’t say
everything I thought.
Martha listened to us, not blinking, not replying. Then, she took a
deep breath, her faith unwavering, and peacefully replied, “Let me
tell you a story, my dears. One day, thousands of years ago, a woman
made a mistake, just as many people still do. It doesn’t matter whether
you say something bad or do something wrong; we all make mistakes
that separate us from God. He could have made sure that we never do
anything wrong, but he loved us so much as we are all his children
that he gave us free will and the ability to make our own decisions and
choices, even if they are mistakes.”
We listened in silence, wrapped in curiosity, waiting to find out
where Martha’s story was going. You could tell by her face that the
words she spoke weren’t of an ordinary tale to her. She believed them
profoundly and with steadfast commitment.
She continued, “We all made mistakes, and there are always people
ready to judge us and sentence us, although they are also making
their own mistakes. The people were ready to kill the woman for the
mistake she had made, throwing stones and rocks at her.” She paused,
observing our silent faces before continuing, “However, there was
one man who thought that violence and judging people were wrong.
So, he stood in front of that unfortunate and frightened woman and
said, ‘You can throw your rocks at her, but whoever is without sin may
be the one to throw their rock first.”
She smiled for a moment and then continued with excitement in her
106

THE LORD’S PRAYER
voice, “And do you know what happened? Just as everyone knew that
there was no such thing as a sinless human, for we all make mistakes,
no one threw their rocks, sparing the woman painful and horrible
judgment. The man who stopped them all from killing this woman
was named Jesus Christ, or Jesus of Nazareth, as they knew him in the
Bible.
“Besides trying to make things right and helping people understand
that there is always a way to be better people, he also healed people
from devastating and fatal illnesses. He didn’t do this to demonstrate
his power but to help people, for he loved all people more than he
could ever love himself. He died to save us from our sins, nailed to the
cross, only to be resurrected and brought to heaven to watch over us.
Although he no longer walks the Earth, he can still hear our prayers
and help us with doubt or pain. He is there when we are sad or when
we are going through hard times.”
As she finished her sentence, she opened the book she had been
holding in her lap the entire time. Then, without saying anything
further, she began to read.
“Our Father who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come,
thy will be done,
on Earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive those who trespass against us;
and lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.”
Martha finished reading, casting a sincere smile upon each of us. “This
107

VITALY
is a prayer each of us should know to protect us in our lives and help
us be purer.” Then, she stood up, concealing the book underneath her
sweater.
I knew she had not hidden it as a surprise to us but that she was
hiding it from the other teachers’ curious eyes.
“Good night,” she whispered as she left the room.
Caught up in the impressions born of Martha’s stories and her
promise that someone was out there watching out for me, always
there when I needed them, I got up from my bed, almost running after
her. She was already halfway across the hall, but I managed to catch
her.
“Vitaly, what are you doing in the hall? It’s bedtime, my dear. It
would be better if you returned to the room and had some good sleep.”
“I know. I will. I am sorry,” I said, “but I wondered if you could
maybe write that prayer you were reading out of the book. I would like
to have it,” I looked at her nervously, nearly jumping from one foot to
another, partly because I was impatient and partly because the floor
was too cold.
Martha smiled at me. “Of course. I will write it out and give it to you
tomorrow at breakfast, but for the sake of both of us, don’t hand it out
to anyone or tell anyone that you have it, alright?”
I nodded.
She smiled and pinched my cheek, “Now, go to bed. Goodnight.”
With that, she turned her back, walking down the hallway as I returned
to the bedroom.
The following day, after breakfast, Martha stood in the middle of
the hallway, discretely observing children as they were walking by her.
“Good morning, Vitaly,” she said, handing me a piece of paper that
she had carefully folded into a small square.
“Good morning, Martha,” I replied, taking the paper. Then, I smiled
at her as I walked away.
108

THE LORD’S PRAYER
When I was alone, I unwrapped the piece of paper and saw she had
written “The Lord’s Prayer” above the words she had recited. I liked
reading those words. They made me feel safe and less alone.
For weeks, I recited the prayer, studying it line by line until I knew
it by heart. Then, I would walk the halls and repeat it in my head,
over and over, making sure that I could recall it any time I needed it.
As I recited the words, I felt protected by them. Like the woman in
Martha’s story, I knew I was no longer alone. I knew Jesus would love
me, no matter how many mistakes I made.
Like Marhta, I believed the prayer had power, and I wanted it to
protect me. I was always a target for older kids to harass me and beat
me up for nothing. So I was grateful to now have this new power to
protect myself.
One night, right before we went to sleep, one of our educators, who
was supposed to make sure that we were all in our beds, wandered
away to do something down the hall. She was an older woman who
would often be the one to take care of us at bedtime. We hated when
we heard her coming because she would make us scratch her feet, only
because she couldn’t do it herself. We never wanted to be the one she
picked, but we were also glad she was there because she protected us
from the older boys. Whenever she decided to leave, that meant the
older boys from the room across the hall had their chance to come
into our room and torment us. I was the one they liked to target the
most, and I always knew when they were coming. I could hear their
laughter bouncing off the empty hallway from a mile away.
As the laughter rose, drowning out the click of the woman’s shoes, I
pulled my covers over my head. Then, remembering Martha’s words,
I began repeating the prayer I memorized. I was sure I must be saying
it aloud as I fervently recited the sentences, thinking of them as
protection, as some kind of shield or immunity.
Two of the older boys came in, and instead of picking on me, they
109

VITALY
immediately started messing with Slavik. Although I was glad I wasn’t
their victim, I felt sorry for not being able to help Slavik. I was safe
and sound, hidden under the words I was reciting, but he was still
vulnerable, not believing in the things Martha taught us.
I prayed harder, thinking of Slavik and how I wanted him to be safe
as well. Before I even finished the prayer, it. At the exact moment I
said, “but deliver us from evil,” someone in the hall yelled that the
supervisor was coming.
The older boys immediately left the room, and I finished the prayer,
“Amen.” I felt so much joy. I believed my prayer worked and always
had faith it would protect me, not just from the older boys at school,
but from more threatening monsters as well, like from witches that
like to hide in little boys’ closets or some of the teachers that weren’t
as nice to me as Martha.
I always believed in Martha and her kindness, and I was interested
to learn about Jesus. So, I often asked her to tell me more. In return,
she brought her new testament and shared a couple of stories from
it with us. It was always easier to sleep following one of her stories
about Jesus than from the scary stories the other teachers like to tell
us.
Faith is an exceptional power of the human mind and was an
incredible source of strength for me. Whether it was the high values of
communism or following in the footsteps of Jesus, I knew what Marth
was teaching me would help me through my life to do good deeds for
others. Still, having faith in Jesus would also bring me help when I
needed it. So, I fostered the belief that he was my helper and silently
prayed to him when I wanted to be loved or appreciated, especially
when I needed a family.
110

16
Too Bloody Curious
I remember pulling down bench seats like these in our cafeteria growing
up.
It is where I spent much of my time talking with friends and avoiding
chunks of fat.
T
HOUGH MARTHA’S STORIES BROUGHT ME MORE PEACE
and joy than anything I had known in my short life; I was
111

VITALY
quick to learn that there were times Jesus could not protect
me, especially when I needed some protection from myself.
As the snow came that year, covering my misfortunes and my
treasures under the white gown of winter, the joyful screams of
children cut through the orphanage. Everyone ran for the doors the
moment the opportunity presented itself, as weescaped our redundant
days. We made makeshift sleds to take advantage of even the smallest
of hills, and when the snow was deep enough, we split into two groups.
Then, we would set out in opposite directions to make our bunkers.
The first to finish their masterpiece would call themselves winners
and gain an immediate advantage in the game, sending a flurry of
snowballs announcing to the other team who had won the first contest.
The cold cut through the gloves we wore, freezing our fingers while
the fresh but biting wind slapped our faces. Mother nature was a
constant reminder to honor our instructor’s commands to pull our
woolen scarves over our mouths. It tried to remind us to avoid catching
a cold, but our dedication never lasted. Our fingers became numb, and
our scarves fell away, as did any thoughts of our suffering. Nothing felt
as good as burying the other team under an onslaught of tiny white
cannonballs and forcing them to retreat. So, we would have spent
hours trying to conquer and ruin our opponents’ bunker.
Still, there was an inevitable end to every battle. The prize? Pride, an
opportunity to claim a small victory in a world where we often felt like
we might be losing at life. For others, the game ended with sneezing,
coughing, and feeling nailed to a bed for a couple of days. Being sick
for me meant being condemned to listen to the occasional snowball
hitting a window or the cheerful screams of other winners.
The cure used for banishinganycold wasone cup of hot tea combined
with one spoon of strawberry jam and one of honey, served to us still
steaming. When I was the unfortunate soul stuck in bed, I knew I
could still enjoy the sweet and tasty treat. With sweat dripping from
112

TOO BLOODY CURIOUS
my forehead, I savored the medicine, knowing just a few cups would
make everything right again so I could return to the game. As good as
the elixir was, nothing was quite as good as a snowball fight.
Between the snow and the holidays, we all looked forward to the joys
winter brought. Winter was like every fairy tale I ever read coming
true. Dreams became a reality, intoxicating my senses with warmth
and celebration. We spent the last week of December preparing for
my favorite day of the year, December thirty-first. We escorted it in
with great pomp and serious commitment. Santa Clause—the one we
called Did Moroz or ‘frozen old man’— was a merry grandpa with a
silver beard who would visit us on the last day of the year to celebrate
a new beginning.
We followed the New Year’s Eve celebration with an entire month
of holiday cheer. We all trusted January first to bring more joy and
prosperity through the coming year. So everyone shared their gifts
with friends all around, visiting neighbors with candy and other treats.
Of course, the best part of January for me was that children were off
school duringthe entire month. So I rejoiced in not visitingclassrooms.
It meant less time trying to keep my fingers warm while writing
assignments the teachers were giving us and more time for snowball
fights or eating the treats brought to us by generous donors.
On January sixth and seventh, we celebrated Christmas Eve and
then Christmas. Though our celebrations were modest compared to
most, we celebrated the glory and monumentality of the New Year’s
spirit. We accepted humble festivities, improving the atmosphere
with modestly made costumes and each taking our turn to perform
holiday songs or recited verses to receive a gift from Santa. I liked to
memorize poems before the event to get my present from Did Moroz.
They were easy to remember and always impressed the jolly old man.
Bearers of goodwill from Germany and other nearby countries
donated the gifts we received, along with candy and delicious food to
113

VITALY
savor. I was so enamored with the generosity of the donors, I often
convinced myself that somebody would remember us on other days,
as well, but somehow, those gifts weren’t finding their way to our
orphanage.
Fortunately for us, the candy we received at Christmas came in large
portions, with various shapes, colors, and tastes, many of which I
tasted for the first time. I preferred gummy bears when I got candy,
always eating the red and yellow ones first. Then, continuing to green
and orange. Sometimes I saved the gummies and ate the exceptionally
made Ukrainian dark chocolate first, even though it inevitably made
me hungry for more. Lucky for me, I didn’t need to share my treats
with anyone during that time because I knew they were also getting
sweets. So, I had the fun game of exchanging the ones I didn’t like in
search of the candy bags I enjoyed the most. These little rituals allowed
us to feel the carefree spirit of the celebrations and festiveness, even
if it only landed on our doorstep but one day a year.
I loved thinking about the candy and the presents we received, but
they were never enough to capture my full attention. I always wanted
something more to do. I remember one holiday when I was bored from
all of those empty hours without classes. I couldn’t stop thinking of
the mechanism that made our Christmas tree rotate. The tree sat in
the center of the room, where we held our New Year celebration. It
sparkled, the lights twinkling as it turned, begging me to come and
see what it had to offer. Since the tree was a significant amount taller
than I was, the entire phenomenon likely appeared more interesting
than it was.
I was fascinated by machinery, so I decided to take my chances and
discover how it worked. I snuck to the tree when I noticed no one else
was near it. Checking over my shoulder one last time, I decided to
explore. I knew there was no way I would see what was happening at
the top of the tree, but the space that separated the tree bark from the
114

TOO BLOODY CURIOUS
ground was wide enough for me to fit underneath.
After one last look, I slid under the branches. The tree’s trunk slowly
spun, its base sticking out of an engine planted to the floor. I could see
how the engine rotated, causing the tree to turn and catch the light
from the ceiling. I poked at the mechanism, searching for the magic
that kept it alive and running.
Unaware of the power of rotating force, I drove my finger into one of
the holes at the base of the mechanism. That is when I discovered that
dozens of differently sized gears and pinions interlaced to instigate
the machinery rolling and spinning. My finger joined the tangle of
equipment, firing sharp pain from the tip through my entire arm.
My head reeled, and my stomach turned at the sight of fresh blood
gushing from the hole, causing a pool of red to spread across the floor.
Forgetting where I was and even the thing that caused it all, a scream
escaped my lungs, causing everyone to drop what they were doing to
rush towards me.
Tamara Vasylivna arrived first, grabbing me to guide me to the
isolator, “Vitaly, what did you do? Why did you put your fingers where
you are not supposed to? Who told you to go under the Christmas
Tree?”
New pain burst from where the teacher’s fingers cut into the muscle
of my arm. I was running to keep up with her brisk stride as she
dragged me down the hall, speaking words that carried a whole new
kind of pain, “You know you won’t get to spend time now with other
kids at the movies this week. You must stay in the medical room until
your wound heals!”
I looked at her with tears in my eyes, wishing I could say I made a
mistake, but I felt that it wouldn’t matter to her as it seldom did. She
wasn’t kind like Martha, often looking for ways to cause us trouble. I
trembled inside for the fear they would ground me and that I might
miss our weekend adventure.
115

VITALY
Scream or no scream, anyone in the school could have easily found
me in the clinic room by following the bloodstained trail I left lingering
in the hall. Still, after a few more stings of alcohol mixing with red
liquid and torn skin and tissue, the teacher left, and I was left to wait
for the pain to go with her.
I didn’t care about the discomfort. This incident wasn’t the first
or even the last time I did something where I ended up screaming in
pain and grounded. I was often left with a tightly-wrapped bandage,
hiding the excruciating pain of what a few gears could do. But, even
though it often brought me pain, I couldn’t resist experimenting with
the mechanisms I found. They fascinated me. I loved revealing their
core, their function. So, it was no wonder you could often hear my
screams bouncing off the walls of the orphanage, but it wasn’t always
like that.
Moments of excitement existed in sharp contrast to the other side
of my nature. I also enjoyed knitting and sewing, carefully adopting
everything my teachers taught me. Still, beyond the mayhem, maybe
the two sides weren’t so different after all. I liked to know how
things worked, and I wanted to create new things from the scraps
I found. It seemed to be the way I approached my life. Every time I felt
overwhelmed, overcome by the inner stirrings of my mind, it was hard
to resist. I would do something I wasn’t supposed to do, intentionally
forgetting everything about being beaten and grounded.
Still, luck was with me that day. The spirit of celebration saved me
from being punished. I played games and ate candy until both the day
and the games were exhausted. Then, because I was too listless to play
football or chase around with Masha and Slavik, I sat at the window
watching the sky transform, spilling a spectrum of colors onto the
peaceful clouds that danced over the children playing outside.
Then it happened again, I was bored watching others have fun,
so I decided to look around the orphanage to find something to
116

TOO BLOODY CURIOUS
entertain me until dinner. I could feel the restless vibration boiling
in my stomach again. I could only hope it would not end in pain or
punishment this time.
I wandered the hallway, burying my hands deep into my pockets,
and that’s when my discovery happened. My fingers touched on a
pair of wires I had found in the backyard just lying around with no
potential of ever being used. I took the wires out of my pocket, holding
both pieces in front of me as I walked. Then, I headed to the playroom,
carefully observing those tiny strings, wondering how I could use
them.
Dozens of buzzing voices began filling up hallways as the children
came in to prepare for dinner. I entered the dorm, still alone, still
observing the wires with great attention when I spotted a power plug
next to the TV. My interest peaked for the first time since getting hurt.
A new experiment was underfoot.
I linked one end of the wires and kneeled in front of the outlet with
only one question in mind, “What will happen?” I wondered.
I put one end of the wire in each hole, creating a power string. After
a single pop of electrical contact, I heard a couple of screams that
slowly transformed into giggles. I had managed to shut off the power
in most of the building, leaving only one part of the orphanage lit and
visible to anyone passing on Fastivska Street. I didn’t want to admit
my misadventure, knowing that I could potentially be punished or
even beaten by a teacher. Instead, I ran out of our playroom and into
the hall, trying to calm my beating heart.
It wasn’t long before they restored the lights, and Tamara Vasylivna
was back to dragging me past the confused faces of my friends. Some
of them were still giggling, linking the image of someone hauling my
body through the hall to the sudden power outage. Even though I knew
I was on my way towards my next punishment, all I could think was,
“That was amazing!!!”
117

VITALY
While everyone else was having dinner, my dramatic screams broke
through the building again.
118

17
My Dear Mommy
My mother when she was 29, almost ten years before I was born.
She was beautiful and very smart. But chose to live a different and difficult
life.
O
NE DAY, AFTER THE FESTIVE BUZZ OF THE HOLIDAY, HAD
WORN OFF, our instructor wanted us to practice our writing
skills. The teacher had arranged the classroom with a few
119

VITALY
dozen chairs and some outdated desks donated to the orphanage by
those who no longer wanted them.
The sun danced off Vasylyna Tanasivna’s golden curls as she
approached her desk, saying, “Hello, everyone!” Her smile glistened
almost as much as her hair. She was one of the few instructors who
made sure she provided everything we needed to live outside of the
orphanage one day. I enjoyed what she taught most of the time.
“I thought we could maybe practice our letters and check how good
you have become at writing.” She looked at us, silent for a moment
before continuing, “You are going to write a letter to someone you
care for….”
“A letter to a friend?” someone from the back asked.
“No,” she grinned. “You are all going to write a letter to your mom.”
Everyone was quiet. I felt frozen and hot all at the same time. My
palms began to sweat as I imagined most of my peers were probably
feeling the same way. I didn’t know what I would say.
Winters were always fun at first, but as the season progressed, it
was often too cold to go snowballing, which narrowed our amusement
options to watching television, storytelling, and making up games.
When I didn’t have adventures to distract me, I often thought about my
mother. I wondered if she was okay or where she spent the holidays.
My time was full of too many hours for questions, but I had no answers.
Vasylyna probably knew it was difficult for us to think of the parents
who abandoned us, but she continued with the lesson. “Now, please,
take your pens and papers.” She drifted across the floor, slowly pacing
the front of the room. She kept her hands locked in front of her the
entire time, her fingers tangled in a mild grasp.
“When writing a letter to someone you care for,” she said, “you
will always start with ‘Dear’ or ‘Beloved.’ At the end of the letter, you
will put ‘Sincerely’ or ‘With love’ followed by your name. All right,
children?”
120

MY DEAR MOMMY
We all nodded.
Trembling, I stared at my piece of paper, not knowing how to start.
I sat, wondering how I should address my mother. What name should
I give her, or was I even allowed to call her “Mom?” Finally, after
minutes of torture that felt like hours, I let the pen touch the paper. I
felt far away from the classroom, like a puppet master slowly moving
the hand of his puppet, causing it to form letters that turned into
words and, eventually, sentences.
Dear Mommy,
Today, I played my favorite game with my friends. It’s called hide-and-
seek, and it was really fun! I found Igor hiding in a wardrobe in one of
our dressing rooms, where I hid once too. There were a lot of birds flying
over the rooftops when we played, and one of the birds pooped on my best
friend’s head. It was so funny we both laughed! My best friend’s name is
Slavik, and he is great.
Slavik’s mom came to visit him, and she brought him some sweets that
he later shared with me. I thought you might want to know that I drew a
picture of you and the sun. I think you are very pretty.
My teacher Martha started teaching me German letters because I like
listening to the language and want to understand what the soldiers are
saying when I watch our people fight fascists in the movies. It is very nice
here. I have lots of friends and good teachers. We learn everything about
everything, and it’s fun, but I would really like you to come and visit me
sometime. My teacher also told me that I have a brother, so you could
maybe bring him along. I would also like to meet my brother.
I found out today that a family in Italy adopted my friend Sasha Bykov.
We used to build electric toys together out of parts we found in the backyard
of our orphanage, so I was sad he left but also envious because he has got
a new family to care for him.
121

VITALY
When will you come to visit me, mommy? I will be waiting for you. Tell
my brother that he can come to see me too if he likes.
Love,
Vitaly
I didn’t sleep that night as all I could do was think about the letter. So
I sat under my blanket with a hand-made battery light instead. I spent
most of the time cross-stitching, so I could be sure that my cross-
stitch table cloth was ready for the upcoming talent exhibition at our
school. Working on it was calming. I liked preparing for competitions.
The little victories always made me feel better, and the cross-stitching
helped me relax and express my creativity.
Because I spent many hours needing to relax, I was proficient at
crafts, carefully concentrating on the details the instructors liked to
see. My table cloth would later win first place at the event. I would be
proud of myself, but sad too. Because even after hours of work, my
winning entry would not return to me. I would not see my tablecloth
again, but I didn’t know it that night. All I knew was that I was grateful
to have the cross-stitch instead of thinking about my letter.
When I finally laid down to sleep, I was so disheartened, diving into
a dreamless night, not even imagining that tomorrow wouldn’t be the
same as every other day at the orphanage.
I did what I could to find distraction and soon realized I probably
had the best one right in front of me. I enjoyed learning, and I listened
to our teachers with rapt attention. It was my only way to escape, so I
pushed myself to be better. I ensured that I sat in the first row in each
class, right in front of the teacher. So, when I raised my hand, she
would call on me to share with the class what I knew. My schoolwork
wasthe only place whereI could stand out and get everyone’s attention,
not with cuts and bruises and my teacher’s punishments, but with my
122

MY DEAR MOMMY
knowledge and good grades instead. To the teachers at the school, we
were a sea of never-ending faces, the abandoned children they needed
to help live in the world. I loved it when one of them noticed me. I
wanted to be the center of attention, standing and having everyone
see me.
A few of the children living in the orphanage were getting frequent
visits from their parents. They were confused by the circumstances,
but at least they got to see them, to talk to them. We wereall clawingfor
bits of affection and savoring even just a couple of hours of undivided
attention like it was gold. Anything was better than nothing.
I could tell because I was one of the unfortunate children who didn’t
get a single visit from my mother. The letter I wrote for her seemed
more like some fairytale our teachers told, with no chances of coming
true. If reviving that fairy tale required only my will and desire, it
would have come to life a long time ago, but my hope wasn’t enough.
It required my mother’s will and desire too, and she didn’t seem to
have any. So, I let it go.
I woke every day to the repetitive habits of another routine. I don’t
know how many days we followed the same pattern. One day flowed
into another, each just like the last until I began to move with no
memory of yesterday or hope for change tomorrow. We got out of our
beds, went to the bathroom, and dressed for the day. After a short
break, we all went to breakfast and attended our classes. We learned
basic subjects like writing, reading, math, history, and art.
After finishing our lessons, before we were to do our homework,
we headed to freshen up and prepare for lunch. Again, the smell of
borscht joined the children exiting classrooms, filling the hallway
with the echoes of yesterday, where we all knew the sounds of spoons
and forks clinging would soon follow.
My days were long and exhausting, so I was always ready to dig into
my plate. Most days, I did, but there was one day I will never forget,
123

VITALY
a day Martha interrupted me. I watched her slowly moving towards
my table, and I remember thinking that she would show her teeth at
me because of the fat chunks still floating on my plate, but the mild
expression on her face didn’t fit the story in my mind.
I froze, unsure of what to do, stung by the unexpected concern in
her eyes,
After taking a deep breath, she said, “Vitaly, dear. Can you please
come outside for a moment?” She never called me “dear,” so, at that
moment, I knew that this day was not going to be like any other day.
Something had happened or was about to happen, something I hadn’t
experienced before.
While I was still trying to understand what was going on, Martha
led me out of the dining hall. My friends were staring at us, glancing
over their shoulders, trying to see what might happen next. Then,
abandoning their plates, they whispered and exchanged their guesses
about what I had done or what Martha was about to do.
I followed Martha, finally escaping their curious whispers. As we
walked through the hallway, I wanted to ask my teacher why she called
me to leave the dining room, but the worried look on her face confused
me, leaving my tongue paralyzed and my mind empty.
“Vitaly…” she said as she stopped and dropped to her knee. Then,
grasping my shoulders, she looked at me with a level of compassion
I’ve still not seen equaled to this day, “I’m bringing you to the office
because your mother has come. She is here, Vitaly. Your mom is here
to see you.”
Everything seemed distant but clear at the same time as years of
hope and pain stuck in my throat. A flurry of feelings flooded my
body, making my chest tighten and my stomach churn, but my face
remained cold and expressionless. As I tried to untangle the knot in
my gut, I remember thinking, ‘Why does Martha seem so sad?’
“Vitaly, are you all right?” Martha asked, unnecessarily consoling
124

MY DEAR MOMMY
me with that fearful look in her eyes.
“My mother is here?” was the only thing I could say. Blinded by
disbelief and surprise, I still couldn’t understand how this day turned
out to be so different from any other day I spent on Fastivska Street.
Without a single warning, everything in my life had just changed.
“Yes. She is right at the end of the hallway. So you do wish to see
her, right?”
I looked into Martha’s eyes. I didn’t nod or use any words. I didn’t
need to say anything for her to see what I wanted. So, she took another
deep breath, and what I think might have been a sigh. Then, she rose,
and we continued walking, side by side, down the hall.
I remember the sound of our steps falling synchronously on the
polished hallway floor, and then I saw her. My mother stood with her
back to us near the school’s front doors. The only way I knew about
my mother was her golden hair. It was one of the first things they told
me about her.
She looked ready to leave, and I wondered if she might have been
gone had we taken an extra minute or two in the hall. Everything in
me tightened at the thought. As we approached where she stood, I
couldn’t think or breathe. I wanted to be perfect. I wanted her to like
me. I wanted her to hug me and love me.
She didn’t turn as we approached, but I noticed she held a small
bag of something I hoped was for me. I thought maybe she brought
something tasty or sweet, as the other parents who came to visit their
children did. I stood silent for a second, only a few inches away from
her, collecting my breath to speak up. My mouth felt so dry. I had
spent my whole life thinking of what she would do when she saw me
for the first time. That’s when I would know. That’s when she would
finally see the boy she left here to grow up in an orphanage.
“Mom?” I asked as if I couldn’t believe that she was standing right
in front of me. I experienced her presence through a fog of disbelief.
125

VITALY
Having her was too perfect to be true. In my memory, she stood
perfectly framed in the soft lighting they sometimes use for taking
portraits. I saw her as if she was a vision, the one that tricks you into
believing in miracles.
I think I still see her as some angel descended from heaven. I’ll
probably never see her for who she truly was that day. She lived on
the pedestal I made for her. I lived hungry for affection, wanting to
feel at least for a second how it was to be unconditionally loved.
We didn’t spend much time together. I don’t remember our words
or if I ever did receive any of the things I wanted from her. Of course,
as circumstances were at that time, what little she gave me was going
to be enough, even if it wasn’t. Even if the only thing I did get from
her was a few seconds of affection in a timeless eternity of waiting for
something more, that was the world to me.
Still, more than anything my mother did that day, what I remem-
bered most was Martha and how she reminded my mother of what
mothers should do. They were only a few feet away from me as I stood
waiting for Martha to take me back to food I didn’t want to eat. I don’t
know if they knew I was listening, but Martha’s raised whisper was
more than loud enough for me to hear. “I think it is disgraceful how
you waited for your little boy to send you a letter before you came
to visit him. It’s been eight years! Eight years! He is an exceptional
young man, and he deserves to be visited at least once a week.”
Martha left my mother speechless. She didn’t have anything to say
in response. So she walked away, leaving me with a kiss on the cheek.
My heart broke, wishing it could be more.
My mother never returned to the orphanage. I know now that
Martha was right for doing what she did, but I was angry for a long
time. My face burned at the thought of what she said to my mother. I
was afraid my mother wouldn’t return after the terrible things Martha
said. What if she took away my chance to show my mother how good
126

MY DEAR MOMMY
of a son I could be? If my mother could see how special I was, I knew
she would want me.
Because of Martha, I was afraid I would never have that chance.
127

18
Surprise Visit
This is the same trolleybus we took from the orphanage to the movies after
Subotnik.
A
FEW MONTHS AFTER SEEING MY MOTHER, Martha
interrupted one of my meals again. However, this time she
had a more satisfied expression on her face, and I hoped that
128

SURPRISE VISIT
meant she hadn’t ruined things between my mother and me after all.
She seemed far more cheerful this time as she said, “Vitaly, there is
someone outside who wants to meet you.”
Her words burst the bubble of expectation floating above my head. I
thought my mom came back, the way Slavik’s mother always came
back to visit him with ice cream and sweets. However, when she used
the words “meet you,” I knew it couldn’t be my mother. My hope tried
to argue, but eventually, logic won the battle. Someone I hadn’t met
before was here to visit me.
Though it seemed my mother might never return to the orphanage
again, at least someone else thought I was worth visiting. I was
disappointed, but I was also excited to see who it might be.
A young man stood facing us as we exited the front doors of the
orphanage to a warm and sunny afternoon. He stood alone in the yard,
tall and robust, like the kind of man I wanted to be one day. As he
smiled a broad smile, I could only stare, walking as slow as possible.
He seemed familiar to me, like someone I should know, but I didn’t.
He sure acted as if he knew me, but I didn’t know how.
He was too young to be my father, and even if I had one, no one knew
him. Our educators told us as much as they knew about our families.
My mother was the only parent on record. So, I never really expected
to see the man who created me, but he wasn’t the only man who might
be in my life. My heart swelled at the thought. I knew I had a brother
named Roustam. I could only hope this man might be him.
The closer I got to him, the more he smiled until he finally decided
he couldn’t wait. He approached us to intercept me, obviously excited
to see me. “Hey, big guy!” he said as he kneeled, tangling my hair.
“Look at you! I didn’t know that you had grown to be such a strong
young man.”
I could hear the thrill in his voice, and it made me smile. I felt safe
and protected by him. Unlike my mother, his presence felt permanent.
129

VITALY
It was a place where I could finally stop worrying, hoping, and praying
someone might eventually come. It was as if every tone he uttered
was the call of my blood.
I observed him for some time before I found the courage to say
anything, “Hello!” I finally responded. “My name is Vitaly. Are you
my big brother?” I held my breath waiting for his answer.
“Yes, little guy,” he smiled. “I am your big bro, and I know your
name. But, I got to tell you…” he leaned as though we were about to
share a secret, “…I like your name very much. It’s awesome, just like
you!” He ruffled my hair again, making me giggle. “In case you didn’t
know, little brother, my name is Roustam.”
My brother stood up, and at that point, I realized that he was there
to show me who I could be when I became a man, even though I
didn’t know anything about him. Before I met him, I just knew him as
someone who existed. That was all I could say about my big brother.
But now, seeing him so confident and happy to see me, it was every
dream I had come true. Finally, I had a family, someone to love me.
“Madam,” he looked at Martha, “thank you for allowingme to spend
some time with my brother. I really appreciate it. I want to ask you if
Vitaly and I could maybe go for a walk and to the movies after.”
I could barely contain my excitement when I heard his question,
praying silently that my teacher would give her approval. I loved the
movies more than anything and now, to go with my brother by my
side was everything. It would be my turn to be like the people I always
watched, not marching in rows of abandoned souls, but walking with
my brother, someone I could have that was just mine.
Martha smiled, looking at my brother, then back at me, nodding
her head. Her nod was the key to my brief freedom, an entrance to a
divine new world, a world where I had a family.
As we began our walk down Fastivska Street, I couldn’t help myself
from jumping. Each leap set free a pleasant tickling in my chest. I
130

SURPRISE VISIT
guess it was the feeling of being accepted, of belonging somewhere.
Anywhere. I almost exploded from it.
“So, what do you do for fun, little brother?”
“Well, I like making things, and I also enjoy going to the movies
each Sunday. Today will be the first time I am going to the theater,
and it is not Sunday.”
He chuckled at my excitement. “Well, I think we ought to change
that! Any day is a good day for a movie.”
“Do you know I make my own toys, big brother?” Calling him
brother scared me a little like he might turn to dust and float away
because I said the word out loud. Still, I had to take the chance. I saw
my brother was invested in my every word, and I wanted him to know
about all the cool things I did so that he would like me.
“Really?” he asked, honestly surprised. “Well, to tell the truth,
Vitaly, I knew you were a smart boy the moment I saw you. You will
turn out fine once you grow up to be like me. I know that.”
I was so happy I ran out of words. He said I could be like him. All of
my dreams were coming true.
We stood at the trolleybus station for a few minutes, waiting for one
to arrive. I was impatient, eager to ride the trolley with my brother for
the first time. It was like a rite of passage for me, a way for us to begin
our life together as brothers.
Finally, just as I felt I couldn’t wait one more minute, a trolleybus
stopped in front of us, squeaking as it was slowing down.
As we entered the trolleybus, we saw it was half empty, so we sat
down. “Always make sure that you give your seat to an elder or a
mother with a child if you have a seat and there isn’t one available for
them, little brother.”
I nodded eagerly and then sat looking through the window, ob-
serving buildings and people as they blurred together, appearing and
disappearing in time with the rhythmic pattern of the trolley’s wheels.
131

VITALY
When I found my words again, I turned to Roustam, trying to catch
his eyes, “Do you go to school?” I asked, “What do you want to do
when you finish school? What do you do for fun?” I couldn’t stop
the questions once I began. I was anxious to learn everything I could
about him, still worried that this might be the only chance I would get
to see my brother.
Roustam started laughing. “Easy little bro…One question at the
time. We will get to know each other.” I smiled, relaxing a little as he
continued, “I’m going to school to be an architect, but I think I’ll join
the army. I want to be a soldier after I finish school.
“What do you want to be when you grow up, Vitaly?”
“I want to become a soldier, too,” I replied, not because I thought
he would expect that answer, but because I wanted to be like him.
Everything he wanted to do, I would do too.
After we finished a movie I was too excited to remember, I continued
my onslaught of essential facts I wanted him to know about me. First,
I tried to explain life at the orphanage, but it wasn’t easy. All I ever
wanted was to live with my family. I didn’t know the words to tell him
what it was like to live without one.
Roustam looked at me seriously before responding. “Little brother,
you are lucky to be living there, trust me.”
I could tell there was more he wasn’t saying, but I didn’t ask what it
was. I didn’t understand his words, and I don’t think I wanted to. Of
course, looking back now, I know what he meant.
He could see I wasn’tready to hear whathe had to say. So, he dropped
the thought, mussing my hair again. “You will grow to be a great guy,”
he said, smiling at me.
I smiled back. All I wanted to do was be happy with my brother for
as long as possible. He took me to show me the tiny two-bedroom
apartment he shared with our mom. He said he lived somewhere else
most of the time, but he came to stay there on the weekends. He
132

SURPRISE VISIT
showed me his boxing gloves and a few of the moves he used to beat
his opponents. I felt empowered because I had someone to rely on
when other boys asked for trouble.
The day I spent with him was the best day of my life, but it couldn’t
last forever. After a few hours together, being real brothers, we
returned to the orphanage, and I had to watch him leave again, not
knowing for sure if he would return. But he could see my worry, and I
think he wanted our day to end happily. So, before he left, he took me
aside and filled my hands with chocolates and candies.
I looked at him, joy bursting from me in a massive grin.
He laughed again. “Knock yourself out, little brother! I will be back
soon,” and with a final tussle of my hair, he was gone, leaving me with
the memory of his smile and a warm brotherly hug.
I couldn’t wait to tell Slavik all about my brother. I ran through the
hallway, trying to find him so I could share my sweets, as he always
did after his mother’s visit. I don’t know if I’ve ever had a happier
moment in my life. I felt I could be up every day and night just waiting
for Roustam to return.
Somewhere inside, I knew my mother wouldn’t be back. A small
part of me was hopeful, but it didn’t have much strength behind it.
On the other hand, I felt different inside about Roustam. I believed
in him, but I had to be careful. From a very young age, I had learned
to lower my expectations of others. So, I wouldn’t end up hurt and
disappointed if things didn’t go as I hoped. I couldn’t let it ruin me if
he didn’t come back.
Luckily, that wasn’t the case. I believed Roustam would return, and
he did. For one of the first times in my life, my hopes and expectations
didn’t go unrealized. Only two weeks after his first visit, Martha came
to me with a smile, and I knew that Roustam had returned. I was
playing outside when he arrived, searching for more parts to go with
the secret I had buried. I thought of making an electric car once I
133

VITALY
found all the parts I needed to build it, but I discarded the thought the
moment I knew he was there.
We walked around the orphanage for a while, having a good chat. I
showed him all of my favorite places to go, and then, once we were
alone, far from the other children, he stopped and pulled a large piece
of the watermelon out of a grocery sack he was carrying. I couldn’t
remember the last time I had watermelon, but I never forgot its sweet
and refreshing taste.
While he left to wash it, I couldn’t help myself from taking a peek
at the other treasures that might be hiding the sack he left behind.
I found a jar of jam, toothpaste, and a few apples, so I knew he was
planning to stay with me for more than just an hour. He wanted to
spend time with me. My heart raced at the thought, but I also felt
tremendous peace settling in my belly, leading me to a blissful place.
For the first time in my life, I realized that I was not alone in this world.
I had a big brother.
Roustam returned wearing an honest smile that made me smile
as well. At that moment, I knew what it meant to be truly happy.
Dropping his jacket to be used as a picnic blanket, Roustam sat with me
on the worn grass near the tree where Igor and I once buried ourselves.
Then, in one of the most memorable moments of my life, he pulled
an army knife out of his pocket and pierced the sweet meat of our
watermelon.
I dove into the massive piece Roustam handed me, which was about
twice the size of the piece he kept. I savored the familiar sensation of
pure bliss sliding down my throat. It almost made me forget about
every horrible thing I tasted until that moment, even the haunting
pieces of pork fat I choked down every day at dinner.
“You have a really cool knife…“ I mumbled between squishy bites.
“You like it?”
I nodded.
134

SURPRISE VISIT
“You can have one too in a couple of years.”
I smiled in response. I was so happy. I couldn’t think of a thing to
say.
“Is anyone bothering you at school or the orphanage…?” Roustam
asked, mildly surprised by my interest in the knife.
“Well…..” I was deciding whether I should tell or just skip the
question. I didn’t want him to think I was weak, but I decided to
take advantage of having an older brother to protect me. So I told him,
“there are some older boys who are picking on me and my best friend,
Slavik.”
“Well, you tell them that your brother will come to talk to them if
they don’t let you alone. And I surely will. I will always have your back,
little brother.”
I smiled. I always dreamed of what it would be like to have a brother
like Roustam, and now it was even better than I could have imagined.
Roustam visited me often, always finding a way to bring me some-
thing sweet and make my day. I appreciated it. I knew he didn’t have
much money. He told me about the struggles he had living with our
mother. Although he only saw her during the weekends, sometimes it
was too unbearable. So, he would skip his visit and stay at the boarding
school where he lived instead. He was trying to teach me what kind of
person our mother was without killing my childish innocence, but I
guessed he was probably hiding the worst of it.
I sometimes wanted to hold the image of my mother I had built in
my mind, but it was becoming increasingly difficult. I learned from
Roustam that living with the woman who gave us life was no fairy tale
at all. While I was still hoping she would return, Roustam showed me
she probably never would. Our mother left me here to be alone, to face
the loneliness of sunsets and the silence of sleepless nights.
In the end, I heeded my brother’s advice and tried to make the best
of living at the orphanage. At least I had a brother to come and tangle
135

VITALY
my hair, someone I knew I could always trust to have my back.
136

19
A New Family
This is our first summer camp. I am in the front with my two sisters,
Masha, Nadya, and the rest of the girls. My brothers Serhij and Slavik are
at the back.
A
S I GREW OLDER, ROUSTAM’S VISITS LESSENED. He still
came by every couple of months, giving me glimpses of how
it felt to have a family of my own. Still, it didn’t fill me. My
137

VITALY
desire to have a real family sat like the pain of hunger in my belly.
It was always present behind the laughter and tears of childhood. I
wanted a mother’s lap when I felt like crying and a father to give me
sage advice.
On Thursday, May 9, 1991, it happened. The day was set aside as
a national holiday to commemorate the heroes who gave their lives
fighting for peace during the Second World War. Every year, there was
a massive celebration with thousands of people flooding the streets
of Chernivtsi. The town gave tribute to lost grandfathers, fathers,
brothers, and lovers. Our class celebrated with the rest, but we did so
within the walls of our orphanage.
We arrived at our classroom that day to see an honored Veteran
standing against the front wall. His posture was proud and strong, but
I thought I could see remembrance and maybe some regret shining
beneath his short eyelashes. As he began to give tribute to his lost
comrades, he straightened up his body and tapped on the classroom
floor with his shiny black boots. He was a statement of unshakeable
pride. It was as if his division commander was right there beside him.
I could see all the years of pain and suffering on his face, but he lasted.
He survived. He was there, regardless of what he had to do, of what he
saw, of what he knew.
“No matter how many years have passed, we will always celebrate
our victory over enemy forces, even as we forget our differences, but
remember those who have fallen fighting for peace and life.” He
sighed but still held his head high as he reached for the memories
he would share with us that day.
“Millions of Soviet people, tens of thousands of residents of the
Chernivtsi region, laid down their lives on the battlefields. We worked
in victory’s name to live peacefully, so all can work and raise children
and grandchildren today. We spared no effort, and now we live without
fear that our life might end the next day. This festival is how we honor
138

A NEW FAMILY
the heroism of those who fought on the front lines, forging this victory
for our country. It is how we express gratitude to those whose courage
and heroism will always serve as an example of loyalty and devotion
to their grateful homeland. All Veterans, war Veterans, and home
front workers are our heroes. They bore brutal wars and won the most
difficult but majestic of victories. This holiday will remain forever in
the history of our country, celebrated so we will never forget them.”
He finishedhis speech, and I felt like each little head in the classroom
understood what true patriotism meant. We listened to the Veteran
speak, and then the teachers gathered us to stand in front of a
large audience and sing “Den’ Pobedy”—a Victory Day song—to
commemorate the celebration. The anthem was well known in the
USSR and has always been part of the festival.
I loved to sing. So my teachers allowed me to sing a solo while the
other kids stood with me as background singers. I showed my talent
at a very young age. Unfortunately, besides singing carols to make
money during the Christmas season, I never had an opportunity to
develop my singing talent, so it fell by the wayside with many of my
other childhood dreams.
I will never forget this Victory Day Celebration, not only because of
Commemoration Day but because, like our little town of Chernivtsi
once did, I also had a whole new opportunity in front of me.
After the celebrations were complete, a teacher pulled me to the
side, saying, “Vitaly, today you will be meeting some potential foster
parents. I want you to prepare a few items before going to bed tonight.
You’ll be going with them right after breakfast to spend the weekend,
and please, Vitaly, while you are visiting, try to be on your best
behavior.”
I couldn’t believe it. It wasn’t even bedtime yet, but I rushed to my
room, making sure I set myself to make the best impression possible. I
had watched so many children visit foster homes and later be adopted
139

VITALY
permanently. This visit was my chance to have a real family.
The family we were meeting had already taken three of my friends
from the orphanage: Masha, Serhij, and Nadya, and although I didn’t
know them that well, I learned Slavik was also coming to our new
home. I was so grateful. Slavik was one of my best friends, and he
knew Masha, Serhij, and Nadya very well.
“Do you think we would be better at the foster home, or would it be
better if we decided to stay here?” I asked Slavik.
He looked around our dorm room, secretly examining everyone to
see if they were listening. Then, he turned back to me, “Well, I think
it wouldn’t hurt to try, would it?”
He was more casual than I was, even though I tried my best to stay
calm. I wanted to believe what Slavik believed, but I thought things
might be more comfortable for him since he knew the other children
very well. Slavik was my botsya. He was my best friend, but I wasn’t
sure what it would be like sharing my new opportunity with people I
didn’t know very well.
“What is Serhij like?” I asked as we left to gather our meager
belongings. “I mean, I know him a little, but not as good as you do.”
Even with my stomach full of porridge, it felt empty, like I hadn’t
eaten in weeks.
“Well, he is cool,” Slavik responded casually, “He is a good friend.
So you don’t need to worry, Vitaly.”
“And Masha and Nadya?” I was still nervous.
“Well, you know Masha a little, and I don’t know what you think of
her, but I will tell you that she is also a great friend, as well as Nadya.
Believe me, Nadya’s like one of the guys. She loves to hang out with
boys and do boy things. So we couldn’t end up with better even if we
asked!”
Slavik was in a good mood, so I tried to pick up some of his positivity
and get ready for the adventure. Still, no matter how hard I tried not
140

A NEW FAMILY
to be nervous, anxiety took its toll. When the teacher told us about
our foster parents, she said they had already taken two other children
from our orphanage, but they didn’t keep them as those kids were still
young and peeing on the sheets.
They gave them back, and we’re coming to find other children they
could take home. I didn’t like that Slavik and I won our fortune on
someone else’s misfortune. It was like we were merchandise with a
return policy, and I worried about Slavik. Slavik sometimes wet the
bed in his sleep, and I didn’t want our foster parents to decide they
didn’t want to keep him.
The teacher warned us to be careful, but I couldn’t stop thinking
about the kids who came back to the orphanage only because they were
soiling themselves. Still, I couldn’t say, “No.” I was finally getting my
chance to have a family. I wanted to see what it felt like to have a home
with parents and even siblings. I wanted to experience a dining room
that was warm with family, not overcrowded and noisy. I wanted to
see if another mother was waiting for me out there. I didn’t want to
ruin it.
I climbed into bed that night, reliving some of my past adventures
and the trouble they might cause. I remembered breaking my wrist,
getting my fingers caught in the Christmas Tree gears, and the time I
made a bonfire with fallen leaves, dry twigs, and some matches I found
in the shed. As the fire grew, I decided to experiment with watching
things burn. My favorite was an old hula hoop I found in a storage
room at the orphanage. I held the hula-hoop over the flames, and as
it started melting, I leaned it over to watch the once hard plastic turn
to liquid. Unfortunately, I became so mesmerized by the spectrum of
colorful drips I lost track of the flame, and one of the melted drops of
plastic fell on my pinky. The pain was as sharp as the smell, and once
again, my screams broke through the orphanage.
Laying there in the dark, I could still feel the scar. I had a lot of scars.
141

VITALY
The instructors were always scolding me for one thing or another.
I lay for hours that night thinking about it, examining the reasons
for my experiments, hoping I might be able to leave them and their
punishments at the orphanage. I played imaginary scenarios in my
head, planning my behavior, and hoping that I wouldn’t get myself
into trouble.
Masha, Nadya, and Serhij were with our foster family for several
months before we joined them. The fact they didn’t come back gave
me hope that everything would go well. I knew that most families
in Chernivtsi had less than six members. So even though my new
foster home would have more than seven with Slavik and me, I wasn’t
worried.
I remembered meeting a family that had accepted many children
from the orphanage and had more than twelve souls in the house,
of which eleven were children. I heard their life was modest but
peaceful, and you could tell that this family had a lot of love to share
and give. Even though only some children were their own, they raised
the parentless kids as equals. I hoped my new home would be the same.
I wanted to be loved and for a parent to care about teaching me to be a
good adult.
I went back and forth between my dream of having a family and
the comfort and security I felt at the orphanage. I was torn, trying to
imagine two possible futures. Even though I always felt sure I wanted
a new family, I suddenly didn’t know what was best for me. Even with
my misadventures, I thought of how the staff cared for us, working to
raise healthy and intelligent children. I wondered if it would be the
same with a foster family. I hoped they would treat me like their son,
but I wasn’t sure they wouldn’t just reject me like my mother.
It was like every dream I ever had was coming true, and I couldn’t
trust it. So, I finally returned to the one thing I could count on, Slavik.
I couldn’t imagine living anywhere without Slavik. He was the only
142

A NEW FAMILY
constant in my life besides Martha. So, even though I was a bit nervous,
I decided; if Slavik was there, I wanted to be there, and even if they
chose to send Slavik back, I could decide to come with him.
Consequently, I decided to dive into the new opportunity and try my
luck.
Our new foster mother spoke with the principal as we posed like
dolls at the marketplace. She would occasionally glance at us and
make another comment to the people around her. I felt exposed like
we were being graded and evaluated. I guess we were, but I wasn’t
sure if we were measuring up just standing there and not having a
chance to show her our talents.
Eventually, she headed toward us with a warm smile, reminding
me of the woman from my dreams. She seemed kind, and her smile
visibly honest but somehow forced.
“You don’t need to worry,” the principal said as she came to stand
before us, “because you have a pair of smart and hard-working boys
there. We have raised them as polite and compassionate young men.
So, they will listen to you, do their chores, and avoid getting into
trouble.” I felt his eyes on me with the last sentence. I imagined him
hoping that my curiosity was tamed and set to be silent.
He didn’t mention anything about Slavik’s occasional bed-wetting,
so I was at peace, knowing that I wouldn’t have to say “Goodbye,” to
my best friend.
The principal introduced us, guiding us to call our new foster mom
“Tyotya Valya’’ which translated to “aunt Valya,” and her husband
was “Dyadya or Uncle Grisha.” Children in Ukraine called any close
family friends their aunt or uncle. I didn’t know if they were close to
us, but Tyotya Valya and Dyadya Grisha were the first aunt and uncle I
ever knew.
As Tyotya Valya approached us, she offered her hand. “Hello, boys!
You must be Vitaly,” she said, looking at me, the curl of her mouth
143

VITALY
never wavering until she turned slightly to continue, “and you are
Slavik!”
“Good afternoon,” we said in unison, looking like a pair of ducklings
ready to follow their mother across a busy road.
“You boys are adorable, and I am very pleased to meet you,” she
said as our teacher approached.
“Well, that’s it,” our instructor exclaimed. “Boys, you can go with
this new family now. You are in safe hands.”
I knew we had just the weekends to spend with our foster family,
as she tried us out to see if living with us would work, and I was
determined to show her it would. I committed to being on my best
behavior, so she would want to keep us in her home forever, and I
could finally have the family I always wanted in my dreams.
144

II
Foster Care
Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is
unhappy in its own way.
—Tolstoy “Anna Karenina”


20
Bazaar Food
These are the traditional Ukrainian dishes that we made for celebrations.
I wish Tyotya Valya made delicious meals more often.
A
FTER SPENDING SEVERAL WEEKENDS with Tyotya Valya
and Dyadya Grisha, they decided to foster us full-time. So,
Slavik and I gathered our meager belongings and left the
orphanage for good. I had prayed to leave that place every day. Still, I
147

VITALY
didn’t feel the excitement I expected to feel. Instead, the pain struck
me, making my stomach linger and twitch.
I missed a lot growing up in an orphanage, though I found ways to
get the most of every moment. I was curious and inventive, and the
orphanage gave me enough freedom to explore my creativity. I could
only hope that my new home would allow me the same opportunities
to create new things, but I wasn’t sure. I was facing an uncertain
future.
Our new foster mother said she didn’t want us to bring junk to her
house, so I left the toys I created behind. Of course, I didn’t think the
things I made were something to be cast aside. Maybe it was because
I knew how that felt or perhaps because I could always find a use for
things others didn’t want. I believed that everything was valuable to
someone. I hoped my toys were something the other children could
enjoy.
As we approached Fastivska Street, I turned one last time to look
at the only place I had ever called home. The tree where Igor and I
built our den looked back at me, reminding me of the time we nestled
under it, praying for a day like today. I thought about the melody of
rain drumming fallen leaves and the comfort of another body next to
mine. I remembered all the dug-up plastic and metal scraps I used to
make toys. I eventually made an electric car from the motor I found in
the shed. It even had a miniature light bulb attached to it to show the
way in the dark. I was so proud of that car. I worked on it for months,
but I had to leave it, like everything else I had there.
I imagine I would have given anything to be away from hordes
of children and live with a family of my own. Having a family is
often taken for granted. Being raised in an orphanage, I learned to
appreciate little things. I did my best to show I cared and was grateful
for every effort someone made to do something nice for me. Right
now, it was foster parents. Even if my new home didn’t live up to the
148

BAZAAR FOOD
dream I had of it, I knew I would do my best to stay with Tyotya Valya
and Dyadya Grisha. So, I left with only a couple of worn-out pieces of
clothes and a lifetime of memories.
“Vitaly!” I heard Slavik’s harsh whisper and turned to see Tyotya
Valya crossing the street. She didn’t check to see that we were behind
her but expected us to follow her wherever she needed to go. I ran to
catch up, and we walked together to the trolleybus stop.
“So, boys, the first place we need to visit is the bazaar. We have
some things we need to bring back home, so follow my lead and stay
close.” Valya spoke as though she had known us our entire lives. The
words “bazaar” and “home” woke something in me that warmed my
heart, but that last sentence is what caught me off guard. Her words
reminded me of my brother’s visits to the orphanage. I hadn’t seen
my brother for a while. It seemed that Roustam had forgotten me, but
I held a tiny flame of hope burning, waiting for my brother to return.
I couldn’t stop believing he would.
As our trolleybus arrived, I couldn’t help remembering the day I
rode with Roustam. I waited for Tyotya Valya to sit first, as I always
remembered what he taught me. Luckily, there were enough seats for
everyone, so I had a chance to sit with my nose stuck to the window
and watch as the bus made its way through the jungle of cars and other
buses.
I tried to remember every meter of our trip. I wanted to memorize
the many parts of Chernivtsi I hadn’t seen, so I noticed every building.
I noticed the theater as we passed, another memory that screamed
Roustam’s name. Everything about this trip reminded me of my
brother. My stomach ached every time I thought about him. Here
I was, setting off on this new adventure while also facing the reasons
why I needed this family to foster me in the first place. Joy and sadness
tangled with each other in my heart, and I didn’t know if they could
live together without destroying one another, but I had to try. I had a
149

VITALY
new family now, and I hoped maybe they could help me fill the void
my brother and my mother had left in me.
Eventually, we arrived at our destination, and it gave me a break
from thinking about my brother. I think I recognized my passion for
cooking the moment we exited the bus. The stop was only a block from
the bazaar, so the pulsing mist of warm spices engulfed me almost
instantly.
We joined the crowd while hundreds of tempting scents over-
whelmed my senses.
It was nearly impossible for me to know
which way to look. There were honey buns, spices, green, red, and
yellow vegetables, apricots, peaches, oranges, bananas, apples, and
watermelons. Every juicy delight imaginable lay neatly arranged and
guarded by the sellers, who were all trying to draw attention, tempting
us to pick their products.
The bazaar was critical to the people of Chernivtsi, who were
survivingon a low budget. It’s where all the middle-classfamilies with
many children would buy food, dishes, and even clothes and shoes.
Everywhere you turned, you could see hundreds of colors, different
materials, and endless lines of faces; some of them selling, some of
them buying. Most people were cheerful and in the mood for little
chats, and I enjoyed listening to the bits and pieces I could catch.
As we traveled the market, observing the goods around us, Tyotya
Valya asked us to help her with the many bags we had to carry. Of
course, we were happy to help as we filled the bags with fresh meat,
fruits, and colorful vegetables. I think we were both looking forward
to an authentic meal at a real table and no fat chunks to eat to avoid
punishments.
“And now, we need to find one fine piece of watermelon,” Tyotya
Valya said, walking in front of us, assuming we would follow. We
passed by a couple of butcher’s shops and tenders with cabbages,
potatoes, fresh cucumbers, and tomatoes before stumbling upon a
150

BAZAAR FOOD
beautifully arranged stand filled with strawberries, cherries, blueber-
ries, and watermelons. The watermelons were brilliant green, but all I
could see when I looked at them was the perfectly pink fruit awaiting
us inside. I was looking forward to sinking my teeth into it. Tyotya
Valya picked one from the bottom of all the stashed watermelons. It
was so big she was barely able to carry it.
After we finished gathering food, we each got a new pair of jeans
and some shirts, so the worn-out clothes clumsily packed in our bags
soon became useless.“You two will be so handsome once you jump
into your new clothes!” Tyotya Valya said, trying her best to make us
feel comfortable, not knowing that she had already won us over with
all the delicious food we would be eating.
Mypositivity spiraledinto anxiety as weneared Tyotya Valya’s home.
Though I knewMasha, Nadya, and Serhij had already found their home
in the lap of dear Tyotya Valya, I feared I might not be accepted or
even able to fit in. Tyotya Valya seemed to sense my fear and paused
to smile at us. Her smile encouraged me, telling me we were welcome
in her family. So, we gladly followed as she turned and entered the
building, still carrying the most substantial watermelon I have ever
seen.
Tyotya Valya, Dyadya Grisha, and their children lived in one of the
old communal apartment buildings. These remnants of the com-
munist party’s declaration that all houses were the state’s property
were more the rule than the exception in Chernivtsi. Some things had
changed since the collapse of the Soviet Union, but much remained
the same. People just found ways to adapt. We walked gray cement
halls banked on either side with doors leading to small apartments.
Every door had lists of names carefully written on the wall next to it.
Next to each name, there was also a doorbell.
I enjoyed looking at the names. Many of the apartments housed
ten or more people. I saw one apartment door with a long list of
151

VITALY
names written to the side of the door. I later found out it was a single
four-bedroom apartment where over twenty people lived. It seems
funny now when I look back, but it made sense then. I was used to full
bedrooms and busy dinner tables. It seemed life outside the orphanage
wasn’t that different after all.
We walked through several long halls and climbed what felt like
a hundred stairs before Tyotya Valya finally reached for one of the
doorknobs and entered our apartment. The entrance was another
hallway that seemed like a narrow, never-ending tunnel. As we passed
through the hallway, I heard a baby crying in one of the rooms. So,
I knew other families were living with Tyotya Valya’s family, still
sharing the spirit of communism. I glanced at the mother trying to put
her baby to sleep as we passed, curiously absorbing every impression
I could. I noted every scuff on the floor and counted the olive-green
doors that banked the dimly lit hall. We would later paint the doors
a beautiful marine blue, but I will never forget that green. It was the
first time in my life that I had a real home with a real family.
We continued down the long-dimmed hallway until we came to
a room where Tyotya Valya’s husband, Dyadya Grisha, was leaning
out the window, having a cigarette. Serhij, Masha, and Nadya sat on
the floor beside him, watching television. Tyotya Valya stood for a
moment, waiting for someone to notice her. When they didn’t, she
cleared her throat, and they all turned to look at us.
“Oh, hello, boys!” I could tell Dyadya Grisha was happy to have us
there, moving from the entrance so we could squeeze in. The room
was a lot smaller than the orphanage’s living room, but it felt warmer,
more personal.
“Shall we all go to the kitchen to dig into that watermelon we
brought?” Tyotya Valya asked with cheer in her voice.
“Oh, you brought the watermelon?” Masha was barely able to
contain her joy.
152

BAZAAR FOOD
“Oh yes,” Tyotya Valya responded, “and Vitaly and Slavik had to
help me carry it. It’s huge. You will see.”
Dyadya Grisha was the first to stand up. “If it is that huge, we would
probably have some trouble cutting it open,” he said, moving toward
the kitchen.
“Let’s go, kids!” Tyotya Valya invited us to join as she followed him.
As we walked through the hallway, Masha, Nadya, and Serhij
were bumping into each other, giggling. They were so happy to see
us. I thought they might be missing the orphanage, but that was
almost impossible since they had everything they ever needed in this
apartment. Tyotya Valya would make sure of it. I could tell she always
tried to make everything perfect, exactly as it was supposed to be.
“We knew they were going to keep you two!” Masha whispered to
Slavik, making him smile at the compliment. “You’ll see it’s very nice
here.”
As we carried the bags of groceries and gigantic watermelon to the
kitchen, I was confident it would be.
Even before we made it to the kitchen, I heard a drawer squeak,
followed by cutlery rattling as Tyotya Valya looked to find a knife big
enough to cut the watermelon.
Everything about that day made me feel like I was finally that child
I always wished I could be. Now I had the close relationships I once
watched in others randomly passing by. Finally, I was one of those
children who could hang on a parent’s elbow or grasp at their hands,
feeling linked to them for life.
My mind relaxed. Every muscle in my body softened, and I could
feel myself getting warmer at the thought. Finally, we were together.
I’m sure the moment might appear trivial to some, but for me, it
was everything. It was the kind of moment children who grow up in
orphanages seldom get to experience.
153

21
Seconds
My new family together, eating dinner in the small kitchen of our new
apartment.
From the front left: Tyotya Valya, Slavik, Me, Nadya, Serhij, Nastya
(Yura’s wife), Masha,
Yura with his girl Valya and Sasha, Tyotya Valya’s son.
154

SECONDS
T
HERE WERE FOUR BEDROOMS and three kitchens in the
apartment. One of the kitchens was enormous, with a high
ceiling. The walls were a tapestry of peeling paint and traces
of evaporated grease, layers of fat risen from the numberless meals
cooked there. Dozens of wires clumsily hung from the walls, draped
in a tangled mass that led to the phone in the hallway. Despite my
natural urge to experiment with electricity and fire, I didn’t want to
get sent away. So, I didn’t think to stay and investigate what the wires
did or what new invention I might create with them.
A fewsteps from the phone lines, a schedule for cleaningday hungon
the wall. It was similar to one we had back at the orphanage. As perfect
as my new home seemed, I could see that Subotnik was not behind us.
We would all have our obligations to keep the house sparkling clean,
but I didn’t mind. It was a small price to pay for what we were gaining.
We all followed Tyotya Valya to the kitchen, carrying the giant
watermelon. Even though Tyotya Valya’s kitchen was the biggest
of the three kitchens, it still felt crowded. A massive wooden dining
table with more than ten chairs around it occupied most of the space,
leaving little room to navigate. Still, we didn’t care. All we could see
was the familiar green and white striped ball that now consumed the
middle of the dining table, just waiting to be cracked and tasted.
Dyadya Grisha sharpened their largest knife while searching for
the best place to begin cutting. He dug the blade deep into the giant
melon when he found his spot, carefully cutting the slices. We all
sat in silence like those gathered for church services, observing and
waiting for our turn to taste the sweet treat. Finally, Nadya stood
up from the table, helping Tyotya Valya with plates and little blunt
knives we used to help us get rid of the tiny black seeds disturbing
an otherwise perfectly pink pallet. By the time we passed the plates,
Dyadya Grisha had finished cutting, and we all dug into the sweetest
fruit I had ever tasted. I savored every bite, thinking of Roustam again,
155

VITALY
whom I missed immensely, but this time I ate with the hope, I would
see him soon and be able to tell him about my new family.
“It’s good, right guys?” Tyotya Valya looked around the table,
observing our happy faces. She smiled, honestly relaxed.
“May I get another slice, please?” I asked, and I got one, escorted
with Dyadya Grisha’s smile. Everything was so perfect as our little
family enjoyed such a pleasure together.
As soon as everyone saw I got another piece, they quickly asked for
the same. “I want one, too,” Serhij said with his eyes wide open. Then,
Nadya and Masha followed his lead. Only Slavik held back, cautious
not to take too much.
Dyadya Grisha smiled at them. He was happy to see everyone excited
until his eyes met Tyotya Valya’s. He froze when he saw her face,
standing back and waiting to hear what kind of reaction was suitable.
I felt an uncomfortable cramp returning to my stomach for the first
time that day. Then, with regret and a bit of shame summoned by
the sweet taste of watermelon in my mouth, I froze as well. Maybe I
shouldn’t have asked, but I did, and it was too late to take it back, as
my plate bore little more than castaway seeds and a watermelon rind.
Tyotya Valya’s posture was as tight as her tone as she responded
to Dyadya Grisha’s pleading look, “I didn’t think it was a good idea
when Vitaly asked, as I think you should always spread the joy and
save a piece for tomorrow as well.” You could tell that Tyotya Valya
was unhappy with how things turned out. I wondered if my birth
mother would have reacted as she was reacting. I wanted to believe
she wouldn’t.
Serhij, Masha, and Nadya frowned, fixedly exchanging glances.
I think Dyadya Grisha felt the burden falling on his back, as he was
the one that gave me the second slice. He paused for a moment, and
then, he smiled, saying, “Let the kids eat.”
That is when I realized that he would never let any of us feel
156

SECONDS
neglected or torn apart, but I could see the uneasiness stuck between
his teeth, making his jaw twitch when he hastened a glance in Tyotya
Valya’s direction. She just moved from the table in silence, taking
her scorn back to the kitchen island, where she began chopping the
vegetables and meat she needed for dinner. She was morbidly silent,
so I stopped eating my watermelon, feeling too guilty to enjoy it.
Dyadya Grisha continued cutting, sharing equal pieces to everyone
around the table, “Eat, don’t let it wait,” he smiled at me, determined
to set things right. That’s who he was; a man made to be a father,
a man to make you smile and laugh. He was always joking with us,
which made me accept him as my parent and trust him to be my family.
All the impressions from that long day buzzed in my head as Tyotya
Valya remained in the kitchen preparing dinner while the rest of the
family sat watching television. I could only imagine how hard it was
to make a meal for more than five people. I remembered seeing the
wrinkles on her face announcing that she was growing tired from
the endless obligations she had. Cleaning and taking care of children
seemed to be an infinite cycle of dull repetition, especially when you
had more than a couple of them. You could clean after someone,
wash their clothes, scrub, rub, and dust, but after only a few days,
you needed to repeat the process. Thinking of Tyotya Valya’s work
reminded me of Sisyphusrolling his rock up the hill every day, over and
over again, waiting for redemption. Of course, Sisyphus was immortal,
but Tyotya Valya wasn’t, and she was doing it out of motherly love,
the way only mothers can do it, but you could tell that she was tired.
I wished I could do something to make her work more manageable,
but I wasafraid she wasnursingangerabout the ‘watermelonincident.’
So, I decided to stick with the others and play a game while Dyadya
Grisha watched the news.
It wasn’tlong before Tyotya Valya’s voice broke through the hallway.
“Dinner time!”
157

VITALY
Dyadya Grisha stood up, gesturing for us to join him.
I was hungry and looking forward to dinner as I inhaled the spicy
smell coming from the kitchen. Tyotya Valya served her special pork
cutlets and mashed potatoes. They were a delicious surprise, and even
though I didn’t see the salad I wished for, I didn’t think of asking. The
dish she served us was extraordinary. The meal from Tyotya Valya’s
kitchen tasted so much better than the food we had at the orphanage.
Maybe it was the quality ingredients or because she prepared the meal
for her family. I didn’t know for sure, but I did wonder if the orphanage
cook’s children—if they had any—had better meals at home or if they
had to swallow fat chunks to avoid being grounded or punished.
The cutlets Tyotya Valya prepared for us had no fat chunks or
anything else that would make me leave a single morsel on my plate.
I was ravenous, and the food was delicious. So, I savored every bite,
but I didn’t ask for seconds. I remembered the painful expression on
Tyotya Valya’s face as she walked away from watermelon treats, and I
didn’t want to upset her.
After finishing our cutlets with potatoes, Tyotya Valya served us
cherry compote. The compote we had in Ukraine was more juice than
cherries, but I loved it, and even though it was something I had at the
orphanage my whole life, Tyotya Valya made it taste even better. I
finished dessert quickly but still enjoyed every sip.
That first meal at Tyotya Valya and Dyadya Grisha’s home was a
feast, but it wasn’t what we ate every day. Tyotya Valya made delicious
food, but meat was rarely on the menu. It was expensive, so we only
had it about once a week if we were lucky. Tyotya Valya also had many
rules to follow while we ate our food. She reminded us to keep our
elbows below the table while eating. We were not allowed to talk to
others at the table, chew loud, or with our mouths open. If we needed
something, we asked politely, unless it was for seconds.
As we finished eating, I thanked her for the delicious meal she had
158

SECONDS
prepared, but she did not respond. Instead, she simply turned her
head and began clearing the table, giving her gratitude to the other
family compliments. That was when I first saw the temper that boiled
in Tyotya Valya’s heart.
I thought many mothers might be bitter and tired of everything they
had to do around the house, but I didn’t understand why Tyotya Valya
was so angry. She wasn’t the only one rolling that rock up the hill in
this house. It was evident from the start that we would all be pushing
it as well. Nadya had helped to prepare dinner, and just minutes after
leaving the dining table to play in the television room, I heard Tyotya
Valya’s voice again, calling the next worker. “Masha? Masha!”
Masha winced, moaning as she stood up. “Oh, yes, I’ll be right
back,” she said, but she wasn’t back for a long time. It took until
almost bedtime to help clean up after dinner. Later, I learned we
would all have our turn. We each had a day when we would help in the
kitchen, cleaning up after every meal. Monday was Masha’s day. On
Tuesday, Nadya helped. Wednesday was Serhij’s. Thursday, Slavik’s
and I helped with cleaning on Friday. I hated doing my chores, but I
always listened to Tyotya Valya, convincing myself that some things
just needed to be done. There are many things in life we don’t like
doing, yet we must do them. So, I made peace with my obligation and
decided that it made playing for a few minutes after I finished even
sweeter.
Later that night, making beds started with Dyadya Grisha trying to
transform the couch into one seemingly cozy bed, but that wasn’t in
the cards for Slavik and me. Nothing he did seemed to work.
Tyotya Valya stood with one hand resting on her hip, looking at
Dyadya Grisha. “When were you planning to repair this couch?”
“Well, I guess I’ll look at it tomorrow. Unfortunately, there is not
much I can do now,” he said, looking at us sheepishly, “Sorry, boys.
It looks like you will spend your night on the floor.”
159

VITALY
Tyotya Valya’s agitation grew as she placed clean sheets on the
functional couch, arranging the bed for Masha and Nadya, while
Dyadya Grisha was setting up a camping-cot for Serhij, leaving a place
on the floor for Slavik and me. Tyotya Valya placed a few blankets over
the space, one on top of another, making something that looked like
a bed. I wouldn’t say I liked the idea of sleeping on the floor, but I
already felt like I was on the wrong side of her, and she was taking her
anger out on Dyadya Grisha. I didn’t want to cause any more problems
than I already had.
After making the beds, everyone settled for the night and waited
for our favorite show, “Goodnight Children.” None of us would have
missed that show for anything in this world. It was the one constant
in our lives, and it was thirty minutes of the sweetest goodnight you
could get, and now, we finally had a family. It was the one thing worth
the sacrifice of sleeping on the floor.
There was a second room where Dyadya Grisha and Tyotya Valya
slept. As the show ended, Tyotya Valya left to get ready for bed while
Dyadya Grisha stayed to smoke one last cigarette. It was one more in
the endless haze of smoke that lingered in our house, saturating the
walls. You could always tell when Dyadya Grisha was home. Even the
hallway smelled of his cigarettes.
“Goodnight, boys! Sleep tight!” Dyadya Grisha smiled as he left the
room.
Tyotya Valya turned off the lights with a brief and slightly harsh,
“Goodnight.” It felt nothing like I hoped my mother’s goodnight wish
would sound, but I was still happy. Finally, I was with my best friend,
and we had a home. Having a mother who was angry at me was better
than having no mother at all.
There were many ways Tyotya Valya was scary. However, I could
still tell there was a motherly figure underneath her strictness and the
disciplinary measures she was implementing in our lives. I estimated
160

SECONDS
that she wasn’t off track as a parent and tutor, but I suppose that
no child likes chores and the yelling that always followed our wrong
decisions and reckless, childish actions. I knew she was doing her
best, but I wished she was more patient. After all, we were only kids
learning to see the world as it was.
As they left, closing the door to their room behind them. I could still
hear their muffled voices in the distance, reaching out to me through
the long, dimmed hallway. It was the only sound left in the apartment
until a barely audible whisper broke my attempts to hear what they
might be saying.
“Hey, guys?” It happened again, but I didn’t know who it was. I
could barely see anything beyond Slavik’s head turned in the direction
of the sound.
The voice was persistent, continuing to call to us, “Hey, who wants
to play ‘I spy with my little eye?’”
It took just a moment longer to realize that fatigue had already laid
on Nadya’s and Masha’s eyes since there was no sound coming from
their bed. There was the only other boy in the room, so I quickly
realized Serhij had something different in mind than sleeping,
The changes and excitement of the day took away the last bit of
energy I had. Still, even though I was tired, the excitement of the day
wouldn’t let me rest, not yet, so I answered Serhij’s question, “How
can we play ‘I spy with my little eye,’ when we can’t see anything in
this darkness?”
Slavik started chuckling, giving his best not to burst into laughter.
“Well,” Serhij was trying to persuade us into curing his boredom.
“We can choose any object, as long as we know there is one in this
house.”
“Not a bad idea,” Slavik replied. “Who will start first?”
“I can.” Serhij’s voice echoed through the darkness again.
“Ok…,” I said, trying to be quiet. “Let’s start then!”
161

VITALY
“I spy with my little eye….” Serhij started the game, and even if
I could not tell in which direction he was looking, I knew that he
was searching the room for the perfect object, “…something with
the letter…F!” he continued, almost yelling.
We were silent for a moment, waiting to see if anyone heard us, and
then, Slavik’s voice broke the silence, “A fart!”
We started giggling and chuckling, trying to choke our laughter
in pillows, but it didn’t work. We soon heard Tyotya Valya’s voice
echoing from the hallway, and we knew it was over. “Quit it! I can
hear you! NIGHT IS FOR SLEEPING! Not fooling around!”
The sound of Tyotya Valya’s voice—trembling in anger—ended our
fun. As quickly as the game had started, our room turned as silent
as a graveyard. At that point, I knew that living with Tyotya Valya
wouldn’t be as easy as it felt the first time I saw her.
162

22
Bra Dag, Sweden!
I am sitting in the center of the picture with five other orphan girls and
singing a Ukrainian song
for Danish and Swedish people.
T
HE KITCHEN SOON BECAME my favorite room in the
apartment. The whole family would gather at the table for
163

VITALY
each meal, sitting in the same order and leaning over the
rich choice of different dishes Tyotya Valya was preparing for us. It
was amazing to have a family and not too many children screaming
to get just a bit of attention. Still, as much as I loved having a family,
the thing I liked best about the kitchen was that no fat chunks were
floating on my plate. So finishing my meals was a pleasure.
As time passed, I would gladly join Tyotya Valya in the kitchen. I
wanted her to love me, and I also loved helping her cook, as culinary
skills became one of my passions. Of course, food is something we
need to consume to stay alive and healthy, but it becomes so much
more in the circle of family and friends. It becomes a bond, an excuse
to give a compliment, a reason to smile, and an occasion to share.
Not long after moving in with my family, thinking I couldn’t be
more blessed than I already was, another great opportunity appeared.
As part of our government’s initiative to help parentless children
and children from large families, they created a summer program
offering the opportunity for children over twelve to go to Sweden
for the summer. If accepted, we would spend our time there with
an assigned family. Tyotya Valya favored Masha and wanted her to
participate. Still, I was the one closest to twelve, so Tyotya Valya asked
the social workers to include both of us on the list.
Although I was grateful for everything I had, I was also looking
forward to expanding my horizons, meeting new people, and seeing
new things. I wanted to see if there was more to the world beyond the
orphanage walls and our communal apartment.
My desires paid off. I was one of the children in our area selected to
go to Sweden. When I heard the news, it was as though my feet had
turned to gelatin. I was so happy. However, since I was the only one
in my family near the age of twelve, I was the only one who could go.
I felt terrible for Masha. Between the feelings of joy I had for myself
and the empathy for my friends who didn’t get the same opportunity
164

BRA DAG, SWEDEN!
as I had, I felt ripped apart inside.
From the moment I found out until the day we took off, I couldn’t
stop thinking about all the new and unknown things waiting for me
on my next adventure. I was anxious about leaving Ukraine for the
first time, but my heart overflowed with positive expectations, and
eventually, my fears and anxiety disappeared. For the first time
in a long time, I was able to say that I was delighted with my life,
although my thoughts often return to the many orphaned children I
knew. Unfortunately, we don’t all get the same opportunities, which
sometimes made me feel guilty. Life didn’t work the way I dreamed it
could as a child, but I was growing up now. The rose-colored glasses I
wore as a young boy fell off, making me see what I couldn’t see before.
We all need to take advantage of the things that come our way, even if
they aren’t there for everyone.
The day I was supposed to get packed and ready for my two months
away was as beautiful as it could be. They told us we would get new
clothes once we arrived in Sweden, making my packing pretty easy. So
I floated through the day as the enchanting smell of summer flowers
embraced our city. Even our kitchen smelled less of grease and fried
food as the windows were open almost the entire morning.
The concrete outside was lazy and lonely as I finished my lunch and
ran to wait outside the door of our apartment building. The people in
our neighborhood usually went out in the morning and late afternoon.
So, the streets were pretty quiet as I got into the bus that would take
me to the airport. Today, the twenty-plus children on the bus and I
had one of the few with a good reason to face the heat of mid-day.
The trip to Sweden also meant that I would set foot on an airplane
for the first time in my life, which made my legs shake, but I knew that
wasn’t fear. I was excited. Everything about this trip was exciting. We
stopped on the way to the airport to pick up one of my friends from
the orphanage, a girl named Nadya—not the Nadya who lived with us.
165

VITALY
This Nadya lived with a large foster family in Chernivtsi. I thought she
was probably grateful she could take some time apart from the nine
people she was living with at the time.
I was never sure why some families accepted so many children from
the orphanage, but I suppose some were in it for the money. Our foster
families received an allowance from the state for each orphan they
fostered. Looking back, I doubt we were getting half the benefit of that
money in the form of new clothes, shoes, and good food. Of course,
we didn’t care. Orphans didn’t have a lot of options. We either lived at
the orphanage or with foster parents. I knew any child would quickly
choose a family over a cold orphanage. Even Tyotya Valya wasn’t what
I expected, but we all have our light and dark times. So, I didn’t think
much about the worst of it. When I was a boy, I judged by the moment,
often forgetting things that happened in the past. I guess all children
see the world in the same manner, making each moment an entire
universe in their hearts.
After a long buzzing drive to the airport—where I learned more
about Nadya and her jolly nature—we boarded the plane. Nadya later
told me that she was feeling sick the entire time we were in the air,
although that didn’t stop her from looking forward to visiting Sweden.
Unfortunately, I don’t remember anything from that first flight as I
was asleep within minutes of leaving the ground. So, I didn’t get to
see the clouds by my side or get a chance to fear the height like Nadya
did.
When we landed in Stockholm, we didn’t do a lot of sightseeing. It
was probably best for Nayda as she was still recovering from the flight.
But for me, I immediately noticed the physical differences between
people from Chernivtsi and those in Sweden. I had never met anyone
from Sweden before, but I couldn’t resist the feeling of being utterly
comfortable, thinking that I could stay forever and be happy. The
people were so kind and generous.
166

BRA DAG, SWEDEN!
The first person we met after landing was a pleasant-faced man
who took good care of us on our way to the place we would live while
in Sweden. Calle, our guide, was tall and corpulent, waiting for us with
a wave and a big grin that made his face seem familiar. I couldn’t help
but smile in return. He was an almost perfect incarnation of Santa
Clause, which made me feel more than comfortable in his presence.
The only thing missing from him was the well-knownwhite beard, but
he still reminded me of Santa without it, especially when he hugged
us. His hugs made me giggle as he had the same round belly I saw in
the holiday stories we watched about Did Moroz.
We followed him to the minibus that would take us to the camp. As
we walked towards the car, Calle was giving out his warm welcome,
and even though we couldn’t understand a word he was saying, anyone
could tell that he was a delightful and friendly person. The man sitting
in the driver’s seat, Calle’s friend, waved to greet us and show us we
were welcome, as well. “Bra Dag!” he said, and I knew what he meant
without needing a translation. That was the only saying I memorized.
Bra Dag, Sweden! It meant ‘Great Day, Sweden!’ It was a great day,
one of the best I ever had.
I climbed aboard the minibus, excited again for another step of
my adventure. I had never ridden in a shared taxi before. During
communism, Chernivtsi had established a trolleybus system similar
to one created in Germany. It was a form of public transportation
that people could afford. After introducing the trolley system, Soviet
Russia also introduced Marshrutkas or routed taxi cabs. They were
primarily minibusses that you had to pay a little more to use, but you
could go anywhere you wanted to go and get there faster.
The road we traveled was sleek, with almost no bumps, and the van
Calle’s friend was driving was far faster than the long crowded buses in
Chernivtsi. One of the windows was open, inviting the playful summer
breeze to tickle my nostrils, presenting the scent of a new country, of
167

VITALY
different soil. The seats were so comfortable I dove in and relaxed.
Our destination was a little town called Höör, and as the drive was
long, I wasasleep almost the entire trip. I tried to outlast my sleepiness
by looking through the window. However, as soon as we left the city to
traverse a road with village landscapes and slideshows of numberless
trees, fields, and bushes, the view quickly turned into green and yellow
blurs that became a sedative to my senses. I was asleep without even
knowing.
When I woke, it was to several different voices, speaking unfamiliar
words and strange tones. The conversation was a random blending of
foreign sounds mixed with the familiarity of Nadya’s words spoken
in a language I could understand. She was trying to answer all the
questions our new friends were asking. Still, as we didn’t know how
to speak English or Swedish, everyone spoke their language slowly,
trying to read each other’s facial expressions for a gist of what was
said.
I slowly opened my eyes to watch the interchange and noticed
that most of what they were saying, they said in a language we all
understood. Every face I saw was full of smiles.
We traveled for miles even after I woke up, and I was trying to
remember as many images of the passing landscape as I could. I
wished I had a camera, but I knew a camera could not capture the
relaxing atmosphere, enchanting scents of summer, or friendly faces
mixed with unfamiliar words and odd gestures. The pictures alone
weren’t enough. The experience was a feeling that mingled with the
memory of strange, majestic birds that had snow-like feathers and a
thin black stripe on each wing. The birds took me back to my dreams
as I watched them fly in circles above a seaside that was occasionally
visible as we hurried toward our destination.
More people poured “Bra Dags!” on our heads when we arrived.
Everyone was so happy to see us, but they weren’t what surprised me
168

BRA DAG, SWEDEN!
the most. I was amazed by the natural tidiness of the place. Neatly
trimmed bushes surrounded the building, and though the windows
looked a little old, the glass was spotless. The hotel was impeccable,
with perfectly placed pavers, neatly manicured grass, and as we were
in Höör—near the southernmost point of Sweden—we were not far
from salty water and the hypnotizing sound of waves crashing against
rocks on the shore.
I thought of how I could learn the language and settle in nicely here.
I was ready to stay with these happy faces and clean streets. Still,
as the sun began to set, the sorrow of homesickness returned, and I
realized that I was already missing Slavik and even Masha, Nadya, and
Serhij. I imagined Nadya probably felt the same way about her foster
brothers and sisters. I guess we all learn to appreciate what we have
once we are away from them.
Circumstances in Sweden turned out to be great. This beautiful little
town where we stayed made sure that two months felt like barely two
weeks had passed. The morning after we arrived, when I woke up,
the only thought in my head was, “I wish I could dip my feet in the
ocean.” So I set a goal to walk on the beach with my feet bare and
put them in the water before they asked anything else of me. I didn’t
realize how far we would travel to get to the water. Still, I was lucky.
As it was summertime, our educators told us right away they were
already planning days at the beach, not the list of chores I would have
expected at home. The only thing I had left to worry about was that I
didn’t have a bathing suit, and I knew the same was true for Nadya.
It seemed we might need to figure something out if we wanted to get
more than just our feet wet.
Before visiting the beach, we had a breakfast of peach jam, butter,
toast, and fresh-squeezed orange juice. After breakfast, one of our
educators came into our room carrying a couple of bags, and as we
opened the bags, a wave of relief passed over my entire being. The
169

VITALY
bags were full of the new clothes we were promised, along with the
bathing suits we needed.
I didn’t sleep this time as the van began rolling its way toward the
ocean. It took nearly an hour to get from Höör to the beach in Malmö,
but it felt like minutes to me. This trip was my first time visiting
a beach or even seeing the ocean. So, I couldn’t wait to jump into
the water, but I would hold myself until I knew it was okay with our
instructors.
We piled out of the van, carrying everything we would need to enjoy
a day by the ocean. Walking on the shore with bare feet was even
better than walking on the grass. My feet sank into the soft sand, and
although it was hot enough to burn, I savored every step.
“Children, please do not swim further than two meters in length,
and those who are not particularly good swimmers should stick to the
shore,” one of the educators warned us.
I ran towards the water, not even waiting for him to finish his
sentence. I was still slightly frightened by the vastness of the sea,
but the moment I saw other children entering the ocean, I knew I was
ready. As I learned how to swim a couple of years before, back when I
was at the summer camp with the other children from the orphanage,
I went as far out as my educators would let me.
The water was colder than the sand, but it was still warm enough for
me to enjoy on a summer day. I could only stay in for a few minutes at
a time before I began shivering, but it felt so good to come out of the
water and lay on the sand to warm myself up again.
As I rested on the beach with my skin soaking in salty water and my
feet dug deep into the sand, I didn’t think about anything. I felt as
clear as the water, without a single worry. It was like I was in another
dimension, a place where it didn’t matter whether I had problems or
who I was. The feeling that I could be anyone and do anything gave me
a freedom I had never considered before, and I hoped it would never
170

BRA DAG, SWEDEN!
go away. Every day I spent soaking in the sun was a piece of heaven
for me. So, I finally understood why all the people who could afford it
were going on vacations.
I swam, and I stood sometimes amazed to silence in the face of the
pristine beauty of the sea. I was thinking about everything that this
sea could be hiding underneath, remembering myths and fairy tales
about mermaids that were enchanting sailors. I wondered if any pirate
had ever dropped the anchor of his ship on this shore.
I felt like I had set sail on one of their adventures. I was so grateful
that my days at Tyotya Valya’s had somehow magically transformed
into days in Sweden with far fewer obligations.
It wasn’t that I
didn’t love living with my family. I just enjoyed a break from the
greasy kitchen and overcrowded apartment. Still, I couldn’t escape
them. While others jumped, danced, and splashed in the salty water,
I thought of how Slavik would love it here. It was so wonderful. I
considered not telling him about the adventure because I didn’t want
him to feel bad. He didn’t get to see what I saw.
Every time we went to the beach, I escaped time missing my family.
But, as we came back, they always returned. Lucky for me, it would
be just in time for lunch. So, I found something to enjoy again. I was
always starving, exhausted from the water and hot air, immediately
diving into my plate and leaving it completely clean.
Within just the first couple of days, the things I experienced would
have been enough for me, but our educators tried to make Sweden as
enjoyable as possible. So they were taking us everywhere, although
everywhere was not as extensive as it sounds. Höör was a small town,
so there weren’t many places to go. Still, staying in this little peaceful
piece of heaven was relaxing. Everything was quiet and clean, with
barely any traffic, crowds, or noise.
I was assigned to stay with a small family: mother Elm, father Ulric,
and their sons Phillip and Fran. It was strange to call any adult by just
171

VITALY
their first name, but I supposed this is the way things were in Sweden.
The family took us to the nature park one day, and it was so exciting.
I had never been to the zoo, so naturally, I couldn’t stop smiling and
feeling amazed that days like this were happening in the world. Nicely
carved wooden benches where you could enjoy the scenery or rest in
the shadow of tall trees lined the zoo’s walkways. I didn’t know where
to look first. I gazed at cages that divided us from zebras, lions, bears,
penguins, and a seemingly infinite variety of tropical birds that were
constantly tweeting and singing. The birds were louder than the rest
of the town, but it was peaceful at the same time. I savored each chirp
and burble, trying to guess from which animal it came.
We went to new places every day. One day, we visited Stockholm, but
we spent most of our time nearer the family home, visiting castles with
lakes. We also saw windmillsand shopped for different cheeses to take
on a picnic. As we traveled throughout the town, I enjoyed noticing the
differences between Chernivtsi’s people and those in Sweden. We were
unique in so many ways, each with different attitudes, foreign words,
and ways of life. Even the air here was distinctive, which I guessed was
due to the salty breath of the sea. It floated, lifted by the breeze, and
no matter where you were, even if you weren’t near the beach, you
could feel it in the clouds or lightly salting your lips. It worked well on
my appetite for sure. I couldn’t remember ever being as hungry as I
was in Sweden. Every meal was tasty and nicely prepared. Of course,
Tyotya Valya’s food was delicious, but it seemed food made with cheer
was more delightful to eat.
One night, after hours of observing and enjoying every moment,
we returned to the family’s home to finish the day by having a feast
with other orphan children and their families. The sun was slowly
setting, and as there were no clouds anywhere, we all admired the
last moments of warmth the sun offered. Then, we sat down on
the soft woolen blankets one of our educators brought to eat our
172

BRA DAG, SWEDEN!
dinners. I enjoyed a ham sandwich that Phillip made for me. To
make it, he placed the ham between two slices of bread covered with
butter and cheese and heated it for forty seconds in the microwave
oven. I had never eaten anything prepared in a microwave before. It
was such a delight. I savored every bite, occasionally sipping orange
juice and reaching out to touch the pointy green grass. I wanted to
memorize every second and keep it forever; every taste, every sound,
the temperature, and the feeling of bare skin merging with soft but
stubborn spikes of grass.
I was deep in my thoughts of how wonderful Sweden could be when
things became even better. I finished the last of my sandwich, and
Phillip turned to me, asking, “Would you like more, Vitaly?”
“I can have seconds?” I asked, not knowing any other way to answer.
“Of course, you can,” he said, laughing. “You can have as much as
you like. Here. I’ll show you how to make one for yourself.”
I ate until I couldn’t take another bite, and then we relaxed until
it was time to go to bed. I never knew what to think of how they
treated me in Sweden. When I was hungry, they let me eat as much as
I liked, and even when I broke the glass door on a bookcase because I
was throwing a ball in the room, no one was upset or punishing me.
Instead, everyone understood it was an accident. Life in Sweden was
happy and loving the way I always thought a family should be.
I was exhausted as I went to bed that night. Of course, it was the
pleasant kind of exhaustion I liked having after a long day of fun.
I sometimes tried to end my night flipping through the pages of a
Pink Panther comic book I found by my bed. I wanted to grasp all the
memories I had collected that day, but it never lasted long. In no time
at all, I was flying again, up high, but now there were no clouds and no
one to chase me. There was only the endless blue of the sky blending
with the mirror of a peaceful sea.
173

23
Our New Home
Almost the entire second floor belonged to our family. There are seven
windows visible in this picture. Two windows to the left are boys’
bedroom windows.
A
FTER TWO MONTHS IN SWEDEN, I returned to Chernivtsi
and nostalgically remembered how much I loved my home.
I was happy knowing that I had someone waiting for me.
174

OUR NEW HOME
Unlike the many times I had returned to the orphanage from summer
camps, only to hug my pillow, be grounded, or even beaten if I did
something wrong, I now had a family and the joys of seeing them
again.
“Look, here comes our Swedish fellow!” Dyadya Grisha joked as he
waved at me. He and Tyotya Valya came to the bus stop to pick me
up, and I was happy to see them and tell them all about my journey. I
couldn’t stop talking about it. I shared story after story, talking the
entire way home, thrilled to have someone listening to all I had to
say. I avoided mentioning how great the food was since I didn’t want
Tyotya Valya to think I liked any food better than hers.
Tyotya Valya was one of the best cooks ever, and I’m sure she knew
it. Still, a woman who put all her energy into making a home might be
offended if I said someone else’s food tasted so delicious. So, I decided
to keep my stories to adventures and the great presents I received.
I wasn’t a little boy anymore, but a stuffed bear was the best gift I
received while in Sweden. I had always wanted a bear to cuddle with
at night, and one of the educators there heard me talking about it. So
the next day they met me with a surprise. As I told Tyotya Valya the
story, she reminded me of how grateful I should be that the people of
Sweden were so generous to me, and I was. But, of course, she believed
I should later express that gratitude and share my treasures with the
family. She began the sharing by taking my bear and giving it to her
son Sasha the minute we got home. I think I could have forgiven her
for taking any other gift I received. I would have gladly given them, but
I finally had a bear to hug at night and not just my pillow. It seemed
Valya believed my memories were enough to cuddle with instead.
Despite a few disappointments, I was so glad to be back. Of course,
everyone in my foster family was also happy to see me, but the person
most thrilled by my return was Slavik. Seeing him, I remembered how
much I missed his humor and the unconditional friendship he gave
175

VITALY
me.
As we settled back into our daily routines, I discovered I wasn’t the
only one who had stories to tell. Tyotya Valya had some novelties
as well. She was always looking for ways other people could help
her get what she wanted. Just as with the program that made my
trip to Sweden possible, Tyotya Valya loved to keep track of every
advantage she could gain in the foster care programs. While I was
on my adventure, she found out that the state gave apartments to
parentless children living with their foster families. Tyotya Valya was
the first on the list to get us a better apartment.
Even though she took care of us, Tyotya Valya always thought about
herself and her family first. Maybe it was natural, but I often felt I
embraced Tyotya Valya because I had no choice. Of course, I could
always do something reckless and earn my way back to the orphanage,
but I felt more comfortable in my new home with my friends than in a
room with dozens of lonely children. So, I did my best to behave and
be obedient, but I knew I would never think of her as my mother.
I knew who my mother was, and I still believed she would come back
one day. The most enduring tie possible linked us. Blood bonded us
for all time, and I could never forget that. I didn’t even want to. So, I
tried not to think about how Tyotya Valya treated me or my mother’s
lack of interest. I decided to think about my brother and how it would
be if we all lived together instead.
Besides, things weren’t too bad in our new home. I had Slavik, and
Dyadya Grisha made my life so much better, as well. Of course, he
wasn’t the one dictating the mood in our home, as Tyotya Valya pulled
all the strings, but he was kind when he could be. In the end, it was an
improvement from my life at the orphanage, so I was happy.
I think she was happy too, as she managed to get her hands on that
apartment, thanks to our existence. She also had more help around the
house. Even though she received money to care for us, Tyotya Valya’s
176

OUR NEW HOME
favorite thing to tell us was that we also had to “earn our keep.” I
realized very young that I needed to work for everything I got and the
things other people got as well, sometimes.
Not having much, I also learned to be grateful. We didn’t have the
same great adventures with Tyotya Valya as I had in Sweden, but we
did have what we needed, making life better for everyone. We ate
meat once a week and had a nice place to live. The new apartment was
massive and very pleasant. It was on the second floor of the building,
near the city center, on Vavilova Street, right across from Chernivtsi
National University. So, the neighborhood was better, and everything
we needed was near our home, including access to our school. To get to
the secondary school we attended, we could walk across the street and
catch the trolleybus that would take us the hour drive to our classes.
The apartment itself was everything that one family could want.
It was nothing like the place that was my first home outside of the
orphanage. They built the rooms that made the apartment seem like a
labyrinth. There were so many doors, all of them leading to different
rooms, so I was never sure which way I was going. But I think that was
also the first reason I liked it. It had high ceilings, five large bedrooms,
two kitchens, one bathroom with a beautiful tub installed, a separate
toilet, and two long hallways.
I was excited to see that we would finally have enough room for
everyone, but I still didn’t understand Tyotya Valya then. Everything
we gained from her was to gain something for herself. I’m sure she
would have thrown us out of the apartment if she could have. Lucky
for us, social service workers were there to make sure she didn’t do
that. She needed us to have the apartment in the first place. It now
made sense why she adopted more children she didn’t want.
Everything the government gave her was for us more than it could
ever be for her. Still, we were children, and we didn’t understand
such things. Tyotya Valya knew how to take advantage of the system
177

VITALY
and keep everything in her hands, pulling strings in her favor. Even
though there were five bedrooms in the new apartment, she put the
five of us, Slavik, Serhij, Nadya, Masha, and me, in two rooms that
were joined to one another but separate from the rest of the family.
A pair of doors divided the space between the boys and the girls, but
you still had to walk through the girls’ bedroom to get to the boys’
bedroom and our bathroom.
The girls’ bedroom didn’t have windows, so it was dark. The boys’
bedroom, where I slept, had two windows. I thought she would have
put the boys in the darker room with no windows, but it was tiny, even
for one person, so luck was on my side this time. Three growing boys
wouldn’tfit and ended up withthe bigger room withthree beds. I guess
the girls were small enough that Tyotya Valya thought they would
sleep in the smaller just fine, and in the end, they did. Tyotya Valya
had Dyadya Grisha set up the couch they used in the old apartment
for them to share. It wasn’t what we deserved, but it wasn’t the living
room anymore or an orphanage. So, we were thankful, feeling like life
was getting better for everyone.
We spent most of our time playing in the larger bedroom. It was
away from Tyotya Valya’s angry hushes, and everyone had fun playing
together with light streaming through to remind us of happy times.
I remember how much I loved that room until I broke one of the
windows trying to do a handstand so our neighbor could see my
feet through the glass. Tyotya Valya was angry, especially since it
happened during the winter. So, she didn’t fix the window right away.
I guess she decided to punish us by making us sleep in the cold. I did
what I could to fix it with tape, but it felt like being back in the freezing
orphanage most nights. Lucky for us, there was a point where Tyotya
Valya stopped being angry, or maybe she was tired of the cold. Either
way, she finally decided it was time to make Dyadya Grisha fix the
glass.
178

OUR NEW HOME
Tyotya Valya kept the rest of the apartment for herself and her
family. Tyotya Valya, Dyadya Grisha, and their son Sasha lived in two
bedrooms connected as our bedrooms were. She gave the fifth room
to her daughter-in-law, Nastya, to have with her husband, Dyadya
Grisha’s and Tyotya Valya’s older son, Yura. He was in the army at
that time. So, they took care of Nastya, giving her one of the rooms to
have for herself.
Even if I wanted to, I couldn’t say that I wasn’t happy living with
Tyotya Valya and her family. My life was better, and to me, that made
it a good life. Still, I was often the target of Tyotya Valya’s brandish
demonstrations. She loved giving me pointed stares and shouting
orders, along with continually reminding me of how grateful I should
be for all the sacrifices she made.
I didn’t see her sacrifice much, but she didn’t need to. We didn’t
care about material goods, as long as we were part of a family, and we
were. In addition, we didn’t have anyone to stand up for us. Dyadya
Grisha kept us going with his cheerfulness and kind words. Still, he
usually succumbed to Tyotya Valya’s cutting glances, so we accepted
what we got, and he accepted his life with her as well. No one wanted
to pick a fight with her, so we did what she wanted, telling her how
grateful we were for her willingnessto foster us and find such a perfect
apartment.
I never resented Tyotya Valya for what she took. She was the only
mother I had in my life, and it was good to be out of the orphanage and
in this beautiful place. I was happy having a family and my friends
there living with me. I loved it, and for a long time, I thought it was
the way it was supposed to be until the social workers visited.
The social workers would announce their arrival a couple of days in
advance, and Tyotya Valya would use those days to do things around
the house and train us into saying what she wanted the social workers
to hear. I was still young, and I couldn’t stand up for myself or my
179

VITALY
friends, but I knew what she was doing was wrong. I always wondered
what would have happened if they appeared at our doors unannounced.
Although I knew we would still lie for Tyotya Valya, she knew it too.
The life we had outside the orphanage was too precious to be tossed
into the wind. Still, I wondered if they might see a little more of the
truth.
Seconds after finding out they had scheduled a visit, she would line
us up, marching and shouting orders as if we were back in Oktobrist
training. “The social workers are coming in a couple of days, and I
want you all to behave and do as I say. Is that clear?”
We all nodded, although I didn’t feel like agreeing to her deceit. I
was disgusted with all the lies she made us tell.
“Now, listen! The social workers will ask you some questions, and
if any of them asks which room belongs to whom, I want you to say
that the girls are sleeping in the room where we set the television.”
She worried about that room because they designated it to be our
playroom. It was the most beautiful room in the house, as it had many
windows, bathing it in the comfort of the shining sun. But, of course,
Tyotya Valya took it for herself, and she couldn’t let the social workers
know. When they asked about the bedrooms, I glanced at Tyotya Valya,
who said everything she needed to communicate with her eyes. So, I
said what she wanted me to say. None of us wanted to go back to the
orphanage or get in a fight with her.
Tyotya Valya was greedy, and I don’t think she ever cared about us as
much as she cared about what she could have for herself by fostering
us. But we didn’t understand that then. We were only children. It was
unimaginable that someone would want to hurt us or take advantage
of us, especially if that person was supposed to nurture us and raise
us properly.
We believed in her because we had to. We had no one else, and even if
we wanted to tell them the truth, we didn’t. The entire time the social
180

OUR NEW HOME
workers were in our apartment, Tyotya Valya was pinching us with her
striking glances, ensuring that none of us said anything we weren’t
supposed to say. It wasn’t long before we didn’t need her stares. We
seldom made the wrong move when the social workers came.
“What would you say about the food here?” One of the workers
asked us, making notes in our file.
We lied, of course. We said that we had everything we wanted, but
we didn’t. We didn’t have toys or new clothes. Having meat with our
meals went from once a week to roughly once a month, and then, only
on special occasions when we had visitors. Life wasn’t as it was on
the first day Slavik and I came to Tyotya Valya’s home. We barely had
enough to nourish ourselves.
The only thing we weren’t lying about was saying that she cooked
well. Of course, she did, but we didn’t mention that she complained
about how much we ate, talking about how she didn’t have enough
money to feed us, although she was getting money for food and forbid
us from asking for seconds, even when we were hungry.
They asked about our clothes and shoes, and we weren’t as nervous
about those questions as we were when one of them asked us how
bedrooms are divided. The social worker passed over the clothing
because Tyotya Valya took credit for the new things I received in
Sweden. As I was the oldest and growing quickly, my clothes never
lasted long, so she passed them on to Serhij and Slavik, whose
wardrobe roughly consisted of my old clothes. Tyotya Valya didn’t
mention any of that, and neither did we. We didn’t tell them we wore
our sneakers until they got holes and cracks in them, so they didn’t
know our feet were soaking wet whenever it was raining.
“All right, great…” the worker responded absentmindedly to all
of our answers. I wondered through the whole thing if they heard
the answers we were giving or if they were only pretending to listen.
Looking back now, I realize the social workers probably knew how
181

VITALY
things worked in our home, but we were just numbers in their book.
Getting us out of the orphanage and into a home, any home, meant
they had done their job.
It seemed many people were looking the other way. The positive
thing was that we still had each other, a feeling to which no room,
even the largest, brightest, or prettiest, could compare.
182

24
Playing Games
During my visit to Sweden, I had my first adventure on a giant slide. This
is me splashing into the water.
W
E LOVED OUR NEW APARTMENT, making it more like
home every day. We didn’t get the best room, but we
weren’t on the living room floor, either. There was also
more space, so it was good for us. We loved playing together, both
183

VITALY
inside and outside, in front of our building. We enjoyed the dull
noise of tapping as we bounced a ball against the wall or traveled
the neighborhood areas to search for new misadventures.
I always imagined how Tyotya Valya must have felt relieved when-
ever we weren’t around, having all the space she needed, just for her
family and herself. So, she let us roam, probably more than she should.
Still, I didn’t think about that as much as I thought about new ways of
having fun with my brothers and sisters and our new friends.
Although I wasn’t at the orphanage anymore, I still enjoyed finding
scraps near the dumpsters to make toys. We didn’t have toys magically
come to us during holidays or even birthdays like sometimes happened
at the orphanage. Tyotya Valya did not like buying toys for us. Most of
our gifts were candy or the clothes we needed from growing so fast. So,
we played with anything we could find lying around, always coming
up with new ways to use it. I wanted to show my brothers and sisters
that there was more to do than watch television. Not to say we didn’t
enjoy our time in front of the television, watching our favorite shows
like “Chip and Dale.” The bright and sunny room made us grateful for
our new apartment, even if we had to be careful of upsetting Tyotya
Valya when we were there.
Most of the games we played were fun, and all of the kids liked to
play them together, though not all of the games were games girls
wanted to play. Nadya acted like a boy more than a girl and enjoyed all
boys’ games, such as football. Serhij and Slavik also loved everything
related to ball games and spending time on the streets looking for
trouble, so Nadya spent a lot of time with them.
Masha was the only one who didn’t like the things the boys wanted
to do. It was hard for her, as she was often left needing to find other
girls to play games with her. I liked girls’ games as well, so I stayed
with her and the other girls on the street sometimes to play the games
they enjoyed, like “Rezinochka,” commonly called Chinese Jump Rope
184

PLAYING GAMES
in America. It took at least three people to play, two to wrap the elastic
around their legs, and the third to jump and do tricks. Masha and I
loved watching how fast some girls could do their tricks.
My best times were when I wasn’t around the house, watching
television, or doing my homework. I wanted to be out in the open,
testing all the toys I made.
Sometimes I had Slavik’s help, and
sometimes I was by myself. Either way, those were the moments when
nothing else around me existed, the moments where I was alone with
my thoughts, inventing, and creating from scraps of outcast material.
We even went as far as to use condoms to make water balloons to
throw at each other on hot summer days. It doesn’t seem reasonable
to think of those water balloons now, but we were just children and
didn’t know any better. It gave us ways to play.
One of my favorite games to make and play was darts. All we needed
to make a little fun was four matches, glue, some cardboard for making
the dart stationery, thread, and a sewing needle. We all knew how to
make darts out of those materials. As boys, we were competitive. So,
we would often gather around the building and find a tree or some
doors to be our target for shooting. May the best dart maker win.
We would bring the game inside if it was too cold or wet to be outside,
using a carpet I hung on the wall as a target. One time, during our
competition, it went as far as aiming at each other. One of my friends
became angry and threw his dart at me, hitting me in the arm. I shot
back at him and hit him in the stomach. We stifled our cries so that no
one could hear us. I was afraid and ashamed to admit what happened,
so I never told Tyotya Valya.
Almost every game we played involved shooting. As boys in Ukraine,
that was our main point of interest. So we played with boomerangs
and spitting tubes we called harkalka. One of our favorite activities
was collecting calcium carbide we found at construction sites, or what
we called magic stones. When we gathered enough, we would toss
185

VITALY
them in the puddles, put them into the plastic bottles filled with water,
throw them, or burn them, and excitedly observe the reactions. I
remember the distinctive, nostril-pinching scent coming from our
experiments, but what I loved most was the flames. We learned from
all the different effects we could create around us, but it was the fun
that mattered the most, so we found as many new and creative ways
to use our precious stones as we could.
One of the best ways to use carbide was to make handguns, which
felt more like bombs as the explosions were massive. The main trick
was to take an empty bottle and add carbide. We would then spit in
it, shake it well, and light it with matches. That was all we needed to
produce brilliant explosions that could keep us busy for hours.
Although many of our games revolved around shooting and ex-
plosions, I also enjoyed doing things that felt more peaceful. For
example, I used colored wires and old telephone cords for making
braided bracelets and figurines. It was relaxing and fulfilling on the
days when quiet thoughtfulness settled on my soul, and, as it turned
out, I learned to appreciate what I could create when I put some effort
and time into it. I also liked reading the Bible and learning something
new every day. I was always trying to be better than anyone else in the
group. Being smart, paid sometimes.
I also liked to keep myself busy observing the tiny lives around us
with a magnifying glass. Of course, the bigger the glass was, the better.
I loved watching insects and seeing what was too small for me to see
otherwise. I also liked magnifying glasses because I could start fires
with only the help of the sun. I could repeat the process as many times
as I wanted, and I never grew bored.
One of the games we enjoyed playing together was Gorodki. In
Gorodki, we made a square-shaped area called a Gorodok, which
means ‘the city.’ Inside the city, we would set up five cylindrical pins
called ‘villages.’ We would throw sticks, knocking the villages out of
186

PLAYING GAMES
the city. The goal was to do it with as few throws as possible.
I enjoyed playing Gorodki, but I also liked being with our neighbors
wandering around the city, discovering new things. I loved hanging
around girls, but boys understood when I wanted to play rough and
laughed with me when one of us farted. Most girls didn’t like that.
While growing up in the orphanage, the boys all slept together on
the second floor. The girls had their dorms on the third. Since we
didn’t always like the same games, it meant we never really spent time
together. I was with boys most of every day for the first eleven years
of my life.
Wrestling with the other boys was one of my favorite games. I like to
prove how strong I wasin physical challenges, but sometimes matches,
where we wrestled, became confusing too. Of course, it didn’t happen
with everyone, but I would get odd feelings with some boys, like the
feelingsI had withIgor. My skin became hot whenwe wrestled, and my
face flushed. I had other sensations, too, in my groin, like everything
became tight and constricted and wanting to explode at the same time.
We all had ways we comforted each other growing up with so many
people crammed into one building. Everyone needs love, and there
were a lot of different ways we expressed it. I loved it when people
could touch each other. As a young boy, I never felt like the instructors
huggedus enough, or ever really. So, nightslike the one I spentholding
Igor were the most comforting for me. It happened a lot that we would
find comfort being close to each other, and we experimented with
how far that could go. We were as curious as any other child about our
bodies, and we only had each other to answer those questions.
As I got older, my focus shifted to thoughts of physical attraction.
My hormones drove my cravings for touch to become something more.
I felt this way about Serhij, as he had the same raging hormones as
me. So, many of the games we played at night were different. When
everyone went to bed, and the lights were off, Serhij, Slavik, and I
187

VITALY
sometimes continued our fun by pretending to be striptease boys. We
would roll up our boxers to look like the thong underwear dancers
wore, and we would dance in front of each other, laughing the whole
time.
Serhij also liked to go to the girls’ bedroom and visit Masha. I think
she wanted Serhij’s attention, but Nadya didn’t. Of course, she didn’t
tell anyone that until later, even though they both slept on the same
bed.
Serhij would return from their bedroom and brag about his time
with girls. He would touch himself a lot as some teenage boys do and I
would get very aroused by his actions. I spent many of my nights lost
in the moment of watching him, not knowing how to act or what to
do.
I often climbed into bed with him at night, after everyone was
asleep. I liked to feel his warm skin against mine. It gave me the
same comfortable, safe feeling I felt that day in the rain with Igor.
When I touched him, everything became quiet in my mind and calm.
Unlike the flying in my dreams, it felt more like floating on a boat in
the middle of ocean waves, gently rocking me.
After the first time I climbed into bed with Serhij, I felt uncom-
fortable the next day, not knowing if he wanted to talk about it. He
never mentioned it, acting no different than he did any other day. He
never told me he did or didn’t want me to do what I did, but as time
passed, I noticed he would do things to get me excited at night. Maybe
he didn’t want to feel alone either and just wasn’t brave enough to
say anything. Realizing he wasn’t rejecting me relieved me from the
burden of feeling like he might get upset.
Communism forbids boys from touching other boys, and it was a
sin in the Greek Orthodox Church as well, where most Ukrainians who
weren’t communists were members. So, I learned from a very young
age that it was not okay to do what I was doing. I felt like what I was
188

PLAYING GAMES
doing was wrong, but hugging pillows wasn’t enough. They weren’t
as warm and comforting as I hoped they would be. They often smelled
of chlorine, and like anybody else, I needed the feeling of being close
to someone.
I wanted to think of my whole life as a game. I wanted to have fun
and forget about the difficult things, but to be honest, none of it was
a game. Under everything I did was that deep desire in my heart to
be loved. Most of what I wanted to do got me into trouble, but I was
curious, and I loved to explore, discovering new things. I worked
to impress the people around me to inspire them to keep me. I also
wanted the love of a mother, but I didn’t have it. So, I found ways to
get it.
Everything in my life was the same desperate search for happiness
I think we all have. I found that happiness with Igor and later with
Serhij, but having it put everything else at risk. To the world around
me, none of my misadventures were as bad as the thoughts I had or
the things I did with other boys. So, I made sure I never told anyone,
not even Slavik, and especially not Tyotya Valya. I hid it from her, and
I focused on “earning my keep.”
I cherished the friends I had by my side and the games we played. I
did enjoy the priceless innocence of my childhood as much as I could,
but I also lived endless nights of restless dreams and the inexplicable
loneliness that nested in my chest. I managed to pretend it wasn’t
there most of the time, but I was sure that it would always be a part of
my soul.
Being close to Serhij was the only thing that made it feel better. Now
that Igor and I were apart, I thought he was the only one who ever
would. I didn’t know then that the person who would make that feeling
disappear forever was yet to come into my life and show me what it
meant to free the bird trapped fluttering inside of me.
189

25
New Friends
Masha with her friend, Nadya and her two friends, then the three boys in
the front are
Slavik, me, and Serhij
S
EPTEMBER FIRST IS CALLED “KNOWLEDGE DAY” in Ukraine
because it is the day children return to school after the summer
break. We were all excited for our first day back to school.
190

NEW FRIENDS
So when we awoke early to the pleasant smell of sausages and fried
eggs, followed by the sound of Tyotya Valya’s voice telling us to hurry,
everyone was happy to listen. We jumped from our beds, quickly
dressed, and then rushed to the kitchen to eat.
Tyotya Valya was supposed to come with us that morning since it
was our first day at a new school, but for some reason, she didn’t. I
guess it was because Sasha, her youngest son, was still a little boy, just
three years old, and somebody had to look after him. Dyadya Grisha
couldn’t come either because he worked all day at the brewery, making
beer. So, we all headed across the street to catch the bus on our own.
As we were leaving, I turned to see Tyotya Valya standing by the
window, watching over us to make sure we walked to the trolleybus
stop and didn’t head off in some other direction. So maybe she did
care sometimes.
We were at the stop only a matter of minutes before trolleybus
number two arrived.
The moment the doors opened, everyone
scrambled to get on first. Of course, we all wanted a seat, almost
running over each other to grab one. I hated fighting for a good spot,
but we all knew the ride was nearly an hour, which was too long to be
standing.
Other students and many adults going to work used the same bus
we took to get to school, so we didn’t always get to sit the entire trip.
Sometimes, there were so many people on the trolleybus the doors
wouldn’t close properly. The bus driver would yell through the bus,
“Does anyone need to get off at the next stop?” If anyone needed to
exit, the bus driver would pass the regular stop by a few meters and let
people out so that no new people could get in. If no one answered, he
would skip the stop and go to the next one. People sometimes waited
hours for a bus that had room for them.
Even if we all managed to get our seats, there was always someone
who thought they deserved it more, even though we were already
191

VITALY
using it. So, we often listened to intentionally loud complaints as we
stared out the window pretending to observe trees, shops, and streets
we had already seen hundreds of times, only to avoid giving up our
spots. Sometimes, when we left the house soon enough, we could walk
back along the route to the University stop to catch a bus with more
available seats.
The stop where we exited was right near the Russka Street Orphan-
age, which was very close to the orphanage building where I lived, so I
knew those streets and buildings and houses like the back of my hand.
Because I started school late, I was in the same grade as Slavik, even
though he was a year younger. I didn’t mind because I was always
happy to have him in my classes with me. As we lined up on our first
day, we met all of our teachers. Some of the children already knew
them by reputation as they taught their brothers, sisters, and older
friends, but I always attended an orphanage school. So, I was going to
meet everyone for the first time.
The person I most remember meeting on that day was one of the
twenty kids who would be in my class. His name was Zhenya, and he
stood behind me during the introduction ceremony.
I was too shy to say anything, but Zhenya came to me immediately,
saying, “Hi. Are you Vitaly?”
I was nervous, but I answered, “Yes,” and asked him, “How do you
know me?”
He replied. “The teacher told me that you came from the orphanage.
Is that true? Did you live in an orphanage?”
“Yes, but we moved to foster care.”
“Oh, cool. I love to go to the orphanage on Fastivska Street to get
fruit sometimes.”
I smiled. “That’s the orphanage where I lived. I guess I might have
seen you there if I hadn’t gone to foster care.” I noticed that Zhenya’s
clothes were not as clean as mine, and I wondered if he might be an
192

NEW FRIENDS
orphan like me, but his comment told me he must have a family. I
guessed they didn’t take care of him very well. Still, I enjoyed talking
to him and was sure we could have fun hanging out.
“Let’s hang out after school sometime. Okay?” I said.
“Yeah! Sometimes my friends and I go to gather apples and pears
after school. You are welcome to join us if you want.”
“That sounds great,” I said. He looked like a decent guy, and I found
him somewhat attractive, so I hoped we could become good friends.
“I go home that way, so maybe we can go home together sometimes.”
I offered.
“It sounds great!” he replied. “So, what do you think about your
new family?”
“I like it! Slavik is my foster brother,” I said, glancing over my
shoulder to search for Slavik. I quickly found him and called out,
“Come, Slavik, meet Zhenya.”
“We live with three other kids that are in the fifth grade. We are on
Vavilova Street, in a nice big apartment. It looks great and is almost
two times bigger than the last place we lived. I share a room with
Slavik and our other friend, Serhij.” I explained while I waited for
Slavik to join us.
“Oh, that sounds like fun! It sounds like things have worked out just
fine for you,” Zhenya responded.
Slavik approached and was naturally very quiet, but he did not mind
making new friends. So, he shook Zhenya’s hand. I could tell he
wasn’t as interested in the conversation but could see in my eyes that
I was eager to speak to Zhenya. So, he stayed, and we all visited until
the lineup was over. Then, we said our goodbyes and all went to our
classes.
Everyone was excited about our first day of school, which grew to
pleasant euphoria once we met our teachers. I liked sitting in front of
the teacher, leaving one desk between the window and my desk. Slavik
193

VITALY
usually sat at that desk, although he didn’t like sitting so close to the
teachers. Eventually, he would discover the pleasant perks of sitting
next to me as he enjoyed correcting his answers during the tests by
looking at my paper, but that first day, he wasn’t happy about it.
Our class master, Vera Mariyivna, took care of our group and taught
us English. I loved her class right away, as I enjoyed learning English,
which she recognized and rewarded every time I made progress. She
was a great teacher, and I appreciated her attention, but I was also
distracted during her class. Even while she was teaching a critical
lesson, I couldn’t help but stare at her teeth. They popped out of her
jaw, looking as if they belonged outside of her lips, and I found it
uncomfortably fascinating.
As we finished our English class, we joined another class I loved,
information technology. I was always fascinated with technology
and planned to enter the world of computers one day. At the time,
PCs were still in the early stages of development, and as our school
worked with a limited budget, we used old and donated computers.
Still, no matter how old the computers were, Informatics was one of
my favorite subjects. I was amazed by how I could manipulatesoftware
and interact with the computer hardware. I admired technology
and everything revolving around computers. My teacher saw my
dedication right away and was eager to teach me everything he knew.
Another passion was born.
My first day of school waslong and exciting, but it eventuallycame to
an end. As we rode the bus towards our building, I recalled everything
I experienced that day. I couldn’t wait to get home and tell Tyotya
Valya everything, but she didn’t seem interested in hearing about my
day. The moment we walked in the door, the only thing she wanted
was for us to do our homework and finish our dinner.
I was almost always the first to finish my homework, even at the
orphanage. So, I helped Nadya, Masha, Slavik, and Serhij finish theirs
194

NEW FRIENDS
as well, as they struggled with math and physics, a subject where
I excelled. Helping them helped me because I wanted to do more
fun things with them, and I always made sure that my efforts were
rewarded, asking for favors back in the form of sweets or even just
the confetti wrappers I was collecting. It was a good deal. I helped
them ensure their homework was correct, had extra treats, and we all
finished with enough time to play outside before dinner.
As we finished our work, I rushed down the stairs ahead of the rest,
stumbling upon our new neighbor. His family had recently moved
into an apartment above ours, so we shared the building.
“Hello!” he said.
“Hello to you! What’s your name?” I replied.
“My name is Vanya. And yours?”
“My name is Vitaly. Do you live in this building?”
“Yes. My family recently moved in. Two weeks ago, we moved here
from Kyiv. My dad was a governor and now teaches at the University.
Where are you from?”
“We just moved here too. We lived in a different apartment. I guess
it explains why we haven’t seen you before on the street.”
“We are on the fourth floor.”
“I live on the second floor.”
“Do you have any friends around?” Vanya asked.
“Yes, I know a couple of friends. You should come with us. We can
hang out. We are going out to our favorite place where there are lots
of garages, and we can play ‘hide and seek’ there.”
“Yes, with pleasure! But I must be at home to do my homework at
eight p.m.” He frowned mildly.
“That’s okay. We have to be home then too.” I replied, “We have
dinner at eight.”
I introduced Vanya to Serhij and Nadya. Slavik stayed at home that
night, still finishing some assignments where he didn’t need my help.
195

VITALY
We all left together for the garages lined up around the blocks
of buildings through our neighborhood. We often looked for the
unsupervised, empty garages and made up games to play in them
until our dinner time would come. As it started raining while we were
still on the streets playing hide and seek, we took Vanya to our secret
hideout. It was a perfect place to play and find respite from the rain,
as well.
After our introductions, I started to hang out with Vanya whenever
I could, playing with him until our dinner time would come. Vanya
liked hanging out with us, and I enjoyed his company, but not long
after meeting him, he stopped showing up, and we had an empty place
in our group once again.
I remember him mentioning something about his parents discour-
aging him from spending time with our group. I always thought it was
because they were from a reputable class and didn’t want their son
following our footsteps or copying our behavior, although I wasn’t
sure why someone would think that we were poor company.
Whenever I would run into him in the hallway, he would say, “Hi,”
but only if his parents weren’t around. When they were there, he
would look at the ground, too embarrassed to look at me, obviously
respecting his parents’ wishes. I was okay with that as long as he
was fine. It wasn’t his fault, and I always had my friends to play with
after finishing my homework. So, it felt good to let him have his life,
knowing I would not be alone.
Besides my friends at home, I also had Zhenya. Every time after
school, when Zhenya was heading towards his home, I tried to walk
the short distance to his house with him before going to the stop to
catch my trolleybus and go home. I did everything I could to spend
time with him. He was very handsome, and he liked the same things
I liked, but the things I loved most were his pretty eyes and smile. I
was utterly infatuated and wanted to spend as much time with him as
196

NEW FRIENDS
I could.
I walked with him and helped him with math. We often returned to
the orphanage, collecting juicy pears and apples after classes, catching
up with my old friends, or spending time alone in the orchard. My
favorite times together were when we would go to the orchard and
wrestle. He was strong, and I liked the feeling of his strength pushing
up against mine. We would both fight to win, but winning wasn’t all I
wanted. I liked how it felt to wrap my hand around the muscles on his
shoulders or feel his thick thigh pressed against mine. He liked it too,
often lingering a moment with his breath hot on my neck before the
grappling would begin again.
He was stronger than me, and sometimes he made me cry, not
because he beat me, but because I felt like he rejected me when he
was too aggressive. It sometimes felt like he hurt me intentionally.
I don’t know why he was angry, but I think sometimes he took that
anger out on me when we were fighting.
One time I was so upset, I went to sit under a tree, and I cried. I cried
so hard I curled up on the ground, wishing I still had my pillow to hold.
Zhenya came and laid behind me, wrapping his arms around me,
saying, “Don’t cry, Vitaly. I didn’t mean to hurt you.”
I didn’t respond at first, but he began rubbing my back, and I felt
better. No one had ever rubbed my back before. I was always touching
someone or cuddling up to them, trying to get as close as I could, but
he was the one rubbing me this time. I felt so loved. I couldn’t be angry
at him for hurting me anymore. He was so kind now.
As we lay there, I noticed the feeling of something hard against the
back of my thigh, and I knew what it was. The familiar feeling of heat
rushed through my body, making my breath heavy. He continued to
rub my arm and back, gradually moving his hand around my waist to
touch the front of my pants. I reached my hands back to touch him, as
well.
197

VITALY
Something happened to me that day. Something different from my
games with Serhij. My heart raced, and I think I surrendered. I was
never sure if I was doing something wrong before, but it was different
with Zhenya. He never pulled away from me. He also wanted someone
to touch him and hold him. I never knew anyone since Igor, who also
didn’t want to be alone. I had a crush on Serhij for a long time. Even
up to secondary school, we wrestled, but it wasn’t the same. My time
with Zhenya was different. It meant more to me than anything else
I had in my life. I knew he would never turn me away, but how was I
supposed to live the life I wanted and know society would not accept
me. I wanted a home and a family with children someday, but I didn’t
know how to have that and feel this kind of joy, as well.
Maybe, I needed this more. I wasn’t sure. I was confused, but there
was no one else to love me. I wanted to spend my time being loved,
touched, and held by someone who wanted to hold me just as much as
I wanted to hold them, but what if someone found out. I didn’t know
what would happen to us if they did.
198

26
The Power of Words
I am performing for one of the talent shows, reciting my poem, and
showcasing my handmade baskets.
I
ALWAYS ADMIRED MY TEACHERS, thinking that it must take a
lot of courage to hold such an important role. As a teacher, you
must be patient, friendly, highly educated, and specialized in
your subject. You must also possess the ability to pass your knowledge
199

VITALY
onto your students, knowing you might spark something to make
them want to study your subject further and make a profession of
it.
Moreover, a teacher must deal with thirty or more different
personalities and try to get the best out of every child in each class.
Teachers open a passion for learning and the potential of opening
doors. They offer relationships and sometimes feed the emptiness
created by abandonment. Teachers like Martha were the parents I
never had. When I did well in school, they gave me the attention and
the admiration I needed to build confidence. Even Tyotya Valya was
proud of me when I did well in school, or she was less cruel, at least.
Good grades meant no punishments.
Not all my teachers were as great as they should have been, but I
know that some of them will forever be on my mind. They wanted me
to succeed, and they were willing to help me do that. They showed
me the many gifts education brought. The more I saw how school
improved my life, the more I hoped to go to university one day. They
taught me to succeed and gave me the hope that maybe my mom and
Tyotya Valya and all the people in my life could see how much I have
to give to the world.
I’ve heard it said that success is ten percent talent and ninety percent
practice. I think it also requires encouragement. As I moved beyond
middle school and entered senior education classes, my favorite
teachers, Ganna Svitlanivna and Olga Larysivna, were the most adept
at motivating their classes. They taught with understanding and
always tried to make their subjects intriguing and comprehensive.
As I had a natural affinity for physics and math, which later led me to
engineering studies at the University of Chernivtsi, Ganna Svitlanivna
and Olga Larysivna always encouraged me to do well in those subjects.
They helped me develop my talents and go beyond my past capabilities,
continually testing my knowledge, intelligence, and skills.
There were also strict teachers I didn’t enjoy as much, but I did well
200

THE POWER OF WORDS
in secondary school. My grades were always top of my class, but those
instructors didn’t inspire me to enjoy their classes much. One of our
most rigid teachers, Mariya Vasylivna, was a great teacher, although I
always thought she took her subject more seriously than she should,
making us take long classes with endless dictates. She was teaching
our native language, and I loved the sound of it, only that I thought that
her lectures were a little boring. I imagine it wasn’t uncomplicated
teaching us a language we were speaking, even in our dreams, but
I think she could have still brought a little more excitement to her
lessons. She might have encouraged me to do more.
Occasionally, she took a break from saying so much, allowing us
an opportunity to do the one thing I did enjoy in her class—poetry. I
loved memorizing the long poems of brilliant Ukrainian poets, and we
had a lot of those to remember during my school years. For example,
I remember studying “Kamenyari,” a poem written by one of the
most brilliant Ukrainian poets ever to live, Ivan Franko. Kamenyari,
translated to English, means “The Stone Breakers.” It was one of my
favorite poems, and as it had almost fifty long lines, it was a real treat
to recite it from memory.
Ivan Franko disapproved of the Soviet system, and he wrote the
poem as a metaphor for the tyranny under which we were living. The
stone in the poem was representative of slavery, and the stone breaker
or “Kamenyar” was Ivan himself, breaking the shackles of oppression
and dreaming about freedom. He lived his life speaking out against the
totalitarianism he experienced while we were under Soviet rule. For
all he accomplished while he was alive, they made a statue depicting
him as a Kamenyar, which he was.
I remember reading that he lived as a poor man, barely having
enough to eat, neglected for his talents, and left by everyone. He
lived his life alone and eventually died alone, as well. Through reading
his poem, I was able to feel his desperation and pain, but the will to
201

VITALY
fight as well. His words reflected, to me, some moments of my life. I
admired him, so none of his poems were difficult to remember.
In addition to Franko’s work, we paid respect to other brilliant
Ukrainianpoets as well, studying“In Eternal Memory of Kotlyarevsky”
and “If Only You Know the Rulers” by Taras Shevchenko and one of
my favorite poems, “Seamstress” by Pavlo Grabowski. Even though
Mariya Vasylivna’s class wasn’t one of my favorites, the brilliant
poems we were studying inspired me. Learning about them taught me
more about my urge for artistic expression and the need to transform
feelings and emotions into words.
Most of the poems I wrote in her class were about my mother. As
I practiced my writing skills, I tried to depict everything I felt. My
thoughts had always revolved around her, no matter how often I tried
to walk away. I felt stifled, trying to understand why she made the
choices she did. I searched for resolution through my poems, trying
to explain my life to anyone who would listen.
As if on cue, Mariya gave us an assignment, asking us to write an
essay about our mothers. I wrote a poem. I still remember the heavy
silence that fell upon the room as I recited it to the class.
Mom, why have you left me early in life?
Why? I am asking you. I’d understand.
Have I caused any pain and scars?
Tell me more to your only friend.
Try to remember, my mom, how I’ve spoken.
My first sounds to you in your arms;
Then when I grew up a little bit older
I’ve written poems about you, mom.
Again, I whisper to myself, “My Mother.”
202

THE POWER OF WORDS
Again, I’m sketching these words with such zeal.
Again, these letters appear “My Mother.”
Again, I’m searching for a smile in a dream.
Why could not I love you, my mother?
Why could not I say to you, “My Mom?”
My heart was broken; my soul was devoured.
But I believed you were the one.
When will I hear your voice so tender?
Carried through the air to me by the winds?
When will I catch it, will it deliver
Happiness, joy, and fulfill all my dreams?
Will that voice teach me first letters?
Will that voice bring me a smile?
Will it remind me of my childhood years
That vanished away from me for a while?
When can I write to you, my mother,
A few poems about us in a dream?
So, you know your son is now older,
So, I can hear, like a nightingale, you sing.
I think I can. Believe me, my mother,
To love you deeply in my adulthood heart.
And scars and pain will be gone forever.
You are my family, and we are now one.
All eyes were on me as I stood in front of the blackboard, feeling naked
and vulnerable and full of pride for the feeling I put into my work. At
203

VITALY
that moment, I knew that everyone in the class felt compassion for
me, as most couldn’t imagine what it was like to live without a mother
by your side. They all had their mothers cooking for them, taking care
of them, singing to them, reading bedtime stories, and what was most
important, caring for them and watching them grow.
Oksana, one of the girls in my class I admired, was always polite,
kind, and very smart. She could solve even the most complicated math
problems, often doing math with me. Today, I saw her hiding her face
from the rest of the class as she sobbed quietly. Although I felt sad
to see her affected by my poem, I was also amazed by how the words
could summon her compassion.
Even the most brutal boy in the class, Oleksiy, who was something
like a class leader, approached me after our session ended. “So,” he
said, hesitating, “you live in an orphanage?”
“Not anymore. I live with my friends and a foster family now.”
“What is it like? Are they treating you well?” He was careful not to
be too pushy, which I appreciated.
“It’s great. We get to live just like anyone else, except I get to live
with my friends.”
“Cool!” He smiled, and I could feel the somber mood lifting, “That
sounds really awesome, you know?”
“Thanks, I guess,” I mumbled, surprised by the course of our
conversation.
“Hey, Vitaly,” he said as he was leaving. “Let me know if there is
anything I can do to help you out.”
“Thanks, Oleksiy….”
He was indeed one of the strongest boys in school, so his affection
meant that I had a protector from potential bullying, and there was
a lot of that around the school.
Even though children are often
considered innocent and pure, it is surprising how cruel they can be
at times. Oleksiy’s help came in very handy.
204

THE POWER OF WORDS
As everyone recognized my talent for writing poems, they often
invited me to write and present my poetry to various school events
and even those initiated by the government. Many of my teachers
committed to helping me develop my talent. I loved writing, but as
I did it more, I began to understand why Mariya Vasylivna was so
demanding. It wasn’t always easy.
She did ask a lot from us, but I learned that the key to great poems,
aside from expressing your emotions and using metaphors, was using
correct grammar, format, and punctuation.
She taught me how
powerful words could be and how to use them to inspire the soul.
However, she also helped me understand how they could devastate it.
205

27
History Lesson
I loved spending time in the Computer Science room filled with Electron
computers made in the USSR. Lines of code on the blackboard are in a
BASIC programming language.
E
VERY DAY I LOOKED FORWARD TO SCHOOL and learning new
things. Then, after school, I would see Zhenya and pick a few
apples and pears on my way home. My life felt so amazing.
206

HISTORY LESSON
Although math and physics were my favorite classes at the school, I
also enjoyed history. Most of the students yawned at just the mention
of the word, but I liked to hear interesting stories about our country’s
origins and the events that changed them.
Our first day began with a brief account of World War II. Our teacher
wanted to remind us of the horrible events occurring during those
frightening years. I was stunned and terrified by the stories he shared
with us, thinking about how people can do great things, but sometimes
those things can turn into real-life nightmares. Each story began
with one man wanting to be all-powerful and ended with catastrophic
consequences that caused thousands of people to suffer poverty, death,
and loss.
I think everyone in the class struggled to understand the reasons
for such horrible events. I often closed my eyes, imagining that I lived
during those unbearable times. I imagined being scared, lonely, and
frightened, unable to find my way home. I wasn’t even sure if I had a
home. Chaos was everywhere, a thousand lips were screaming, and I
didn’t know what to do or where to go.
I would soon need to open my eyes, grateful I wasn’t alive then, but
I remembered that my mother was a baby during that war. I wondered
where my grandparents lived at the time and what they were doing to
survive. I’ve never met my grandparents. I didn’t even know if they
survived the war. Was my grandfather a soldier? Was my grandmother
forced to take care of my mother all by herself? What was the story of
my family history?
I didn’t know anything about who I was and how I ended up in an
orphanage. I felt like I had no roots to hold me to the ground. What
did my mother go through as a child? Maybe I could understand my
story if someone gave me some history about her.
The teacher changed from the subject of battle to talking about
relations between the countries. I tried to focus on him and throw
207

VITALY
away the questions I couldn’t answer, but they never disappeared
completely.
That night I fell into a world created by the mist of dreams. I was
in slippers, shorts, and a t-shirt, running through the darkness. It
was cold, and I could hear monsters speaking. They were running
around in madness, killing people. I was trying to figure out what was
happening as I watched people’s lives ending in pain and agony.
The creatures had cloaks, all dressed in black, as they were growling
at people, running around through strange masks they wore over their
faces. I didn’t understand their language. Still, as their voices broke
through the night, I knew what they were saying. “Get them! Wipe
them off from the face of the Earth! I want them all dead and gone by
midnight!”
I could barely see through the thick darkness around me. Chaos
was unraveling everywhere, and I didn’t know why I was there,
running around clueless with my heart in my throat. My slippers
were continually falling off my feet as I tried to speed up and run away.
Why was I wearing slippers? It didn’t make sense. I didn’t know what
I was doing, nor what I was supposed to do. So, I hid in the bushes.
I watched the creatures as my shorts and shirt suddenly transformed
into a towel wrapped around my waist, the knot at my hip the only
thing keeping it in place. They concealed their faces beneath black
robes, but something was missing from the garment. I wasn’t sure
what. That’s when a flashback hit me. I knew I should place red
threads on the black robes to end this madness and finish them all.
I searched the ground around me, trying to find a way to stop them
when I realized that I was holding the threads in my hand the entire
time.
As I carefully approached the creatures, a man ran in front of me.
He was a blur, cutting off my path to jump onto one of them.
“We will always be here. We will always be a part of you. You can’t
208

HISTORY LESSON
control that!” one of the creatures said to the man, lifting him in the
air with an invisible force.
They struggled for some time, and although I wanted to help, I
couldn’t.
I stood frozen, not in fear but wrapped instead in the
inexplicable strings of my dream. Sometimes, no matter how hard I
tried, my dreams just wouldn’t let me do what my mind wanted to do.
Like when I tried to run faster, everything would move in slow motion,
controlling me beyond my comprehension and set above my will.
I could barely breathe, covered in a cold sweat, my forehead burning
with fever. Then, something in me shifted, and I realized where I was.
I was in a dream. I made peace knowing the image around me wasn’t
real. The creatures left as soon as that happened, leaving only the
black robes behind.
As I looked around, I saw the man was still lying on the ground,
joining hundreds of lifeless bodies, all merged into one catastrophic
moment I couldn’t handle. So, I forced myself to wake up. Luckily, I
didn’t scream, so I didn’t need to explain why I was wide awake in the
middle of the night.
All I could think as I lay my head back on the pillow was that I
wanted to hold it instead like I did when I was a little boy alone in the
orphanage. Who were the monsters in my dream, I wondered? Who
gets to decide they willcrucify all those people? I wishedI had someone
in my life to explain these times of tragedy to me. Unfortunately,
I couldn’t talk about it, especially with Tyotya Valya. I knew she
wouldn’t care.
We didn’t go to church often, but I did go to bible studies whenever
I could. I remember learning the story of Sodom and Gomorrah. The
bible said that divine judgment destroyed the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah as punishment for their sins. I wonder who decided what a
sin was and what was okay.
I wondered if it would be the same for me if the people around me
209

VITALY
knew my secret. Would they react like the monsters in my dream? I
didn’t want my life to be a sin, but I couldn’t deny what I felt when
I was around boys like Zhenya. I couldn’t resist spending time with
him, maybe because I didn’t know why it was wrong.
When the Nazis killed millions of Jewish people in the name of God,
was that different than God destroying Sodom and Gomorrah in the
name of love?
210

28
My Sweet Sixteen
This is me at 16. I took a picture for my passport in the same turtleneck
sweater.
T
HE WEATHER USUALLY WRAPPED MY BIRTHDAYS in rain,
fog, and cold wind, but my sixteenth year began with falling
snow. It snowed for most of the day, not stopping until the
evening sky sparked against it. Turning sixteen seemed like a massive
211

VITALY
number for me, though I already felt much older.
I always thought being born was a good reason to celebrate, but my
life told a different story. It was too expensive to celebrate birthdays at
the orphanage. Over three hundred children lived there, so I never had
a day that was just mine, nothing to tell me I was special. I wonder,
what could show better that not all life is important than a building
filled with abandoned children?
Living with my foster family was a little different. Even though we
didn’t get to throw a party and invite friends, we did have a small
celebration. Everyone in our house loved Lady Caprice cake, and
Tyotya Valya made it for birthdays and other special occasions. We
all got only one piece of cake per day, which annoyed me. It was my
cake and my day, but Tyotya Valya’s rules every time, but still, I was
grateful. She did give me a bigger slice than the others. Also, Lady
Caprice cake was very complicated to make. It had seven layers of
honey dough smothered with boiled condensed milk, buttercream,
and sprinkles of nuts and grated chocolate. It was one of the most
delicious sweets I’ve ever tasted, and Tyotya Valya’s was the best.
In addition to the cake, my sixteenth birthday was the first time I
got something special. Dyadya Grisha and Tyotya Valya decided to
buy me a water-resistant mechanical watch. I loved my present, but
it also reminded me of my summer in Sweden. One of the many gifts
they gave me during my visit was a Casio electronic watch. I liked it
more than the mechanical version, but Dyadya Grisha decided that
the first watch would look better on his wrist than mine and took it
without question.
They took all of my gifts and dispersed them to their family, telling
me I had to share. But I guess now it was my turn to have a watch
of my own. I don’t know if they were trying to redeem themselves,
but I didn’t say anything. I loved mechanical watches, and this was
my first genuine gift from them that was not clothes or shoes bought
212

MY SWEET SIXTEEN
to replace the threadbare garments we usually wore. So, I decided to
treat it as a special gift from the first time I put it on my wrist.
Dyadya Grisha was happy to see me happy, smiling and patting my
head before he went to work. While we waited for Tyotya Valya to
make lunch, I laid my head on the watch and listened to its endlessly
ticking. It was very soothing and gave me hope for better years to
come.
After our lunch was over, we had our piece of cake and went to our
room. That was it. Tyotya Valya didn’t want more time with us than
that. Still, we didn’t mind. We had a Monopoly game in our room,
so we decided to play it. We loved playing Monopoly. Everyone was
highly competitive. So Monopoly made us fight a lot, as we were taking
the game too seriously, but we had fun too. We cheated each other,
looking for ways to own as much property as possible, filling them
with tiny houses and hotels.
When we were near the end of the game, baby Sasha came into the
room uninvited and began wrecking the board with his meaty hands
and feet. I wasn’t happy with him, so I pulled him aside, away from
the game.
Though I didn’t hit him and never meant to hurt him, he started
crying in a high-pitched tone that made my chest pulse. “Sasha, come
on….” I said, trying to make him stop, but it was too late.
As expected, Tyotya Valya appeared at the door to our room, her
face swollen in rage, “What did you do?!”
I never had a chance to answer. Instead, she just yelled until her
voice was the only thing you could hear in the entire apartment, saying,
“… How dare you do that to my son?!!”
I boiled with rage in return, forgetting everything I ever knew about
her. She didn’t even know what I did. I jumped from the ground and
fired back with my tone raised as never before, “He came in and started
wrecking everything! Do we wreck his toys?!” I was out of my mind,
213

VITALY
feeling like I had left my body.
“Don’t you dare yell at me!! Don’t you dare even look at me the
wrong way, got it!?” Though I thought it impossible, Tyotya Valya’s
voice became even louder.
“I don’t see the difference between you yelling at me and me trying
to defend myself!” I was still trying to make things right. I didn’t see
any reason for Tyotya Valya to be yelling. We hadn’t done anything
wrong.
Blinded by my rage and provoked by her merciless shooting, I
couldn’t hold myself back. I said everything I hadn’t said in the last
four years of living here, and finally, Tyotya Valya became quiet. Then,
she marched out of the room.
I knew she couldn’t afford to lose her authority. Our altercation
couldn’t be over so quickly. So I listened as she marched through the
hallway and into the kitchen, where I knew she had been boiling linen.
Everything was still and quiet for a moment, bringing my attention to
the feeling of humidity in the air mingling with the scent of laundry
powder.
When she returned to the room, she carried the stick she used for
mixing the laundry. She usually used it to stir the boiling water and re-
move all the dirt and stains from our many adventures. Unfortunately,
I knew she planned to use it for something else this time. Tyotya Valya
always looked like she was ready to boil over, but the look on her face
as she approached me with the stick was different. It was calm and
clear, and I knew I had crossed a line. Nothing, not even the fact that
it was my birthday, could save me now.
Everything happened in slow motion as I watched her raise the stick
above my head, aiming to hit me. I managed to soften the impact on
my body by crossing my hands over my head before she could bring it
down for the first blow.
I felt red-hot welts forming along my arms, from the wrists to
214

MY SWEET SIXTEEN
elbows. I didn’t know how long her fury would boil inside of her,
but I also wasn’t in a place to find out. After several blows, my rage
boiled again, and I took the stick out of her hands, breaking it in half
across my leg.
I don’t know why I was so angry. It wasn’t the first time she hit me,
but I think I had decided it would be the last. Maybe, I was in shock,
or perhaps I had finally had enough. I couldn’t believe she would do
this on my birthday, ruining the whole day for all of us. Whatever the
reason, before that day, I was unaware I dared to do anything against
her.
Once she realized I had broken her stick, she started mumbling
somethingand exited the room, marchingthrough the hallwayagain. I
knewshe wouldn’tgive in. She waslooking for somethingelse to finish
her task. So, I ran towards the door, rushing out of the apartment with
only what I was wearing.
Tyotya Valya followed me, watching me make my way to the
building’s entrance, yelling at me the entire way. “Come here, boy!
Don’t make me chase you!” Her voice echoed across the empty hall as
she lifted the new stick she had found in the air, waving it at me.
I looked at her, struggling between facing her and running away.
Finally, I decided it would be wiser to run. So, I burst through the door
and ran down the steps to the frigid streets, feeling exposed to shame,
loneliness, and the stubborn snowflakes that were still falling from
the sky.
I walked the streets for some time without a coat and with snow
melting through my sneakers. Still, I didn’t feel the pain. I didn’t
look for ways to excuse my actions or think of apologizing. Instead,
the only thing I could comprehend was getting even. So I thought of
serving my revenge cold without telling anyone about my plans.
As I thought of things that could hurt Tyotya Valya the most, the
only thing that crossed my mind was the apartment where we lived. I
215

VITALY
knew she would do anything to have the apartment only for herself
and her children. The fact that her family had to share a home that
belonged to abandoned children was a thorn in her side. So she liked
to forget the circumstances under which she got the apartment in the
first place and plan for what she would get out of it.
She knew that we wouldn’t be around much longer, as we would
become self-sufficient once we turned eighteen, and I had no doubt
she would find a way to put us out on the streets the moment that
happened, but I had another plan. I was only two years away from the
day when she could say “Get out!” without even blinking, so I had to
do something to make sure that Nadya, Masha, Serhij, Slavik, and I
wouldn’t end up on the streets, and would ruin her plans the way she
destroyed my birthday.
It was still early in the afternoon. So, I went to talk to the social
workers. They claimed on several occasions that they gave us the
apartment to keep us safe and sound even after we turned eighteen.
“Vitaly, what are you doing here and without a coat?”
Vira
Mykhailivna, the social worker who had visited our home several
times, was surprised to see me in her office, but I think she was even
more surprised to see me so poorly dressed on such a winter’s day.
I didn’t answer her. I had questions of my own. “You said you
worked for us more than you work for Tyotya Valya, right?”
She looked at me, and I saw the realization in her face. I don’t know
if it was the welts on my arms or the puddle my wet clothes were
making on her floor, but I saw Vira become determined to help me.
“Sit down,” she said, throwing me a donated sweater that was sitting
on one of the office chairs. Then, she sat across from me, pulling my
file from her desk. “The answer is in getting a passport and signing it
with your apartment address as your residence. That way, you have
proof the apartment is registered in your name when you become an
adult. That would make it yours legally.
216

MY SWEET SIXTEEN
“As you are nearly….” She paused to look at the file and grimaced
before she continued, “…alreadysixteen…Oh dear, today. Vitaly, I’m
so sorry. I can help you get a passport.”
She spent the next couple of hours with me, makingmy plan a reality.
She took me to get a photo, finish the paperwork, and take care of
everything I needed. The work was tiring, but I knew that the result
would go in my favor, so I stuck with it.
That night, when I came back home, I was so grateful that kind
workers like Vira existed. Thanks to her, I returned home knowing it
was my house, and she couldn’t take it from me. So, I felt no fear in
facing Tyotya Valya, but I knew I had more to do to ensure it stayed
that way.
Before going into the building, I started looking around, searching
for a pebble or small rock. I knew that the windows of our room looked
over the streets to the west of our building. I remember watching
sunsets at night, so grateful we had such a view. I also knew that
everyone would be in there playing, away from Tyotya Valya’s rage.
So I gathered several stones from the ground and started throwing
them at the window.
Slavik opened it, saying, “Vitaly! You are here.”
“Open the doors, please!” I whispered to him as loud as I could.
He disappeared from the window, so I rushed into the building to
wait until he opened the doors.
I entered the apartment quietly, whispering, “Where is she?”
“In the kitchen,” I could barely hear Slavik. He was so quiet. I don’t
remember ever seeing Slavik so afraid, but at that moment, he looked
like he might have been the one she attacked. He almost was when he
tried to defend me, telling her it was Sasha who had ruined our game
and that I hadn’t done anything wrong.
Tyotya Valya had turned on him, but I stepped forward again, taking
the brunt of her rage. I couldn’t let her hurt Slavik, but I could see that
217

VITALY
he was still afraid she might want to try.
I wasn’t afraid anymore. So, I slipped into the room, trying to
ignore Slavik’s and Serhij’s worried expressions, and put on some
dry clothing.
Nadya was in the room. She was also worried. She was the first to
ask, “Where have you been?”
“Shhh.” Slavik’s hush was almost as loud as her question.
I looked around to see if Masha was around. She wasn’t, which was
perfect. I could tell them about my plan. Masha was devoted to Tyotya
Valya, so I couldn’t afford the risk of revealing anything to her yet. I
wanted Tyotya Valya to feel the sting of it, the way I was still feeling
the sting of her strikes against me. Besides, if she didn’t know, she
couldn’t make a plan. By the time she realized what was happening, it
would be too late.
“I got my passport, guys. That means we can keep my part of the
apartment without Tyotya Valya taking it away when the time comes.
Once you are sixteen, I’ll help you do the same. We won’t tell Masha
until it’s almost her eighteenth birthday, or this won’t work. So, you
have to be quiet about this. If we do it correctly, we can’t have our
apartment taken. It belongs to us.”
They looked at me silently, and I knew they understood the impor-
tance of what I was saying, and I knew, when the time came, they
would do as I asked. Everyone looked up to me as the oldest, and
they would follow my lead. Serhij and Slavik were next in line, so I
knew they could get their passports in June. I eventually explained
the benefits to Masha, and she went at the end of the summer. Nadya
was the youngest by two years and would need to wait, but everyone
would do what they needed to do when the time came.
Tyotya Valya did not leave the kitchen before Dyadya Grisha was
home that night, probably because she thought I was locked out,
standing in the cold. Masha stayed in the kitchen with her, helping
218

MY SWEET SIXTEEN
with dinner, and I knew no one else would tell on me. By the time she
saw me come out of the bedroom to eat, it was over. We both had time
to cool off, and Dydya Grisha was there to stop her from continuing
her assault if she tried. I knew there was nothing more she could do
that night, but things never returned to the way they were between us.
I went to bed early, not wanting to think of the unfortunate circum-
stances that occurred or stoke the embers that were probably still
burning under Tyotya Valya’s calm demeanor. When I returned to my
room, I saw my new watch was gone. When I asked about it, Slavik
told me she took it back. I wasn’t surprised, but I was angry. That
was the only gift Tyotya Valya had ever given me that was all mine. I
couldn’t believe she had taken it back.
I knew that things could have ended differently.
I could have
remained silent and put up with her yelling. Still, I was glad I didn’t. I
couldn’t let myselftake another punishmentI didn’t deserve or believe
that she deserved to take anything else from me. No matter how many
times I went over the situation in my mind, I just couldn’t make myself
regret or change what had already happened.
I felt strange as I lay alone in my room, watching snowflakes fall
from the night sky. Snow always gave birth to little butterflies in my
stomach, stirring memories of cold fingers and snowball fights. It was
always so comforting to remember what we did as children. But, this
time, I knew my life would never be about playing in the snow again.
It was time for me to make a plan for the future, to figure out a way to
take care of my brothers and sisters before Tyotya Valya tried to take
everything away.
219

29
Christmas Traditions
Traditional Christmas meal with my foster family left to right: My
Babushka Halina (Tyotya Valya’s mother), Dyadya Grisha’s mother,
Dyadya Grisha’s nephew, Dyadya Grisha, Nadya, me, Nastya’s daughter,
Nastya, Masha, Tyotya Valya, and Sasha.
I
LOVED DAYS THAT WEREN’T ORDINARY, days filled with a
magical quality of importance and celebration. Of course, I never
220

CHRISTMAS TRADITIONS
enjoyed facing the harsh realities of the following morning when
the magic would suddenly vanish again, but that never stopped me
from believing. When I woke up on the next holiday, I always felt that
things could change, that everything would be alright.
One of the holidays I liked was on December nineteenth, when we
celebrated Svyatyy Mykolay, who Americans called St. Nichola. Like
Santa Clause in the west, Svyatyy Mykolay, or Father Frost as we
sometimes called him, was a favorite of most children in Ukraine.
I remember celebrating the festivities at the orphanage. From the
moment we opened our eyes, we knew it would be a great day, as
there would be food and presents for us. The presents came from
the donations of people who still had some kindness in their hearts.
People would bring toys and clothes and my favorite, candy. I was
grateful to the generous people, though most of my thoughts didn’t
stay with them long as I would rather guess what my gifts would be.
Like most Ukrainian families, we would have a big dinner, and
our teachers would make bags filled with candy to give to us. As we
received our bounty, our educators shared stories about St. Nicholas.
Those stories were the reason I appreciated the holidays.
“The story of St. Nicholas goes hundreds of years back,” one of our
teachers would say. “He came from one of the few families who were
rich at that time, but that didn’t affect his feeling of empathy, as he
always shared everything he had with those who were less fortunate.
From him, we learn to share and help each other.”
Though most of us had heard the story many times before, we
sat with wide-eyed anticipation, waiting for them to tell us what St.
Nicholas would do next.
I always thought that his life taught us something, so I was happy
to share presents and gifts to honor him. Members of the Greek
Orthodox Church were very generous, which made me think a lot about
how communism tried to take their religious beliefs away. I didn’t
221

VITALY
experience a lot of religion, nothing more than what Martha taught
me. So, I often didn’t know what to believe, but I always felt that God
was there, giving me strength and supporting me when I needed help,
but God could not hold me as a Mother could. I was grateful to have
Him in my life, but He couldn’t wrap his arms around me or make me
feel like someone special.
Still, having faith helped me feel like I was a part of something
greater, some bigger plan that included everyone. Not having much
as a child, I often put the abstract above the material, so my wishes
usually revolved around those things you couldn’t buy. I believed
celebrations and holidays brought people together, summoning the
kindness I knew we all had buried deep inside. I thank my educators
for teaching me that.
Despite the many people maniacally indulging in Christmas and
New Year’s sales and discounts, I was at peace whenever I walked
along busy streets decorated with holiday cheer. I loved the holidays
and how everyone wanted to greet January first as a better and more
generous version of themselves than they were the rest of the year.
So, here I was, part of a massive movement of great expectations and
wishes for the coming year, having some of my own, as well.
St. Nicholas Day, New Years Day, and Christmas Eve celebrations
were great distractions from everyday dullness. However, they also
stirred the desire to be loved. I often wondered what my mother was
doing during the holidays. I dreamt of family celebrations with her
and Roustam, all of us sitting around the tree laughing and loving
each other. The thoughts stirred a dull ache in my chest and questions
I didn’t know how to answer. Was she alone? Was she lonely? Did
she think of me, at least for a moment? I didn’t know, and I wished I
didn’t care, but sometimes I did.
My dreams of Roustam slowly died the longer we lived with Tyotya
Valya. She didn’t do much to make St. Nicholas Day memorable for us.
222

CHRISTMAS TRADITIONS
Except to prepare a nice dinner and give us the chance to eat meat, to
her, it was an ordinary day. We didn’t receive presents or tell stories. I
never knew if she wasn’t aware of the importance of St. Nicholas or if
she just lacked the will to make that day special, but St. Nicholas Day
was just like any other day of the year.
We still had our New Year festivities to look forward to, although it
wasn’t as fun as our educators made it at the orphanage. We didn’t
dress up in costumes to showcase our talents or open our presents
under the big tree.
Instead, Tyotya Valya prepared tasty dishes,
including cake, sweets, and even more meat. She cooked the entire day
so that we could all spend our evening enjoying the spirit of the New
Year celebration, but it wasn’t just for us. The biggest celebrations in
our house only came when Tyotya Valya and Dyadya Grisha had their
friends and family joining us.
Tyotya Valya would always prepare the best meals when they would
come, and we would eat together as we watched the New Year’s
celebrations on television. Then, we would talk until early morning
with her and Dyadya Grisha’s family members and friends.
After the New Year’s celebrations were over, most Ukrainians began
preparing for January seventh, the day we celebrated Christmas. As
the Greek Orthodox church uses the Julian calendar to recognize Jesus’
birth, our Christmas Eve was not on December twenty-fourth, but on
January sixth instead, making January seventh our Christmas Day.
No matter the day, the spirit of Christmas was the same as it might
be in any Christian home. For us, it also meant we would spend the
day with Tyotya Valya’s mother, Halina. Babushka, or Grandmother,
Halina loved talking about Christmas. It reminded me of listening to
the stories of St. Nicholas told in the orphanage, but she was not quite
as cheerful.
She asked us to sit around her as she inflated like a balloon, full of
pride like she was the only one worthy of sharing the story of how
223

VITALY
Christmas began, “We count our days on Earth from this day forward.
On this day, hundreds of years ago, the Son of God was born as our
savior….” She sighed and made a significant pause to observe our
faces, inexplicable pride written on her wrinkles as she continued,
“Jesus’ mother, the Virgin Mary, and her husband Joseph lived in
Nazareth. Although Mary was pregnant, they traveled the long journey
to Bethlehem to oblige the Roman Emperor Augustus’ order. But as
they arrived, Bethlehem was swarming with people, and Mary and
Joseph couldn’t find a place to sleep.”
Even though I read the story manytimes in bible class, I listened with
great dedication, waiting for her to continue. It seemed she enjoyed
having all the eyes in the room on her as she spoke. “They finally
stopped at a house, asking the landlords to give them a place to stay
for the night, but the owner of the house said that there is no place for
them. As his wife saw that Mary was pregnant, she felt sorry for her
and offered to let them spend the night in the stable.
“As they entered the stables, grateful for the woman’s generosity,
Mary saw three bright stars shining upon them from the sky, and she
knew that she would give birth to the Lord’s son that very night.
“And so it was…Mary gave birth to Jesus, and that night the angel
descended from the Heavens to tell all the shepherds that their Lord,
the son of God, was born. They hurried to the barn to kneel and
worship. Following the same star, the Three Kings, also called the
three wise men, came to give their gifts to the son of God.
“One of the Kings gave him gold as a symbol of royal power, to wish
him to rule righteously and with might. The second gave him incense
as a symbol of God’s will and as a reminder to let God rule his life.
Finally, the third King gave him myrrh to express his faith that God
had sent us His prophet.” Her eyes sparkled, as ours did, too, lit up at
the thoughts we were having of the presents Jesus received.
“Thousands of lamps were lit that night by the believers to shine
224

CHRISTMAS TRADITIONS
the way for their savior. We put a candle in the window to this day
to remember and share our faith with the world. Our candle also
welcomes wanderers without families to join our celebration of this
special time.” I didn’t know how many people Tyotya Valya would
invite into her home. Still, Babushka Halina’s words reminded me of
walking the streets and seeing all the windows lit with candles and
how some of those people probably would welcome strangers into
their homes.
“Jesus performed many miracles in his life, and that is why we
celebrate this day with devotion and faith.” Babushka Halina ended
her story here, nodding her head continuously to prove her point. Her
last words erased the pleasant memories I was having of love floating
like stars through the streets of Chernivtsi and brought me back to the
room.
Listening to the stories of Jesus reminded me of Martha again, and
the night she introduced us to the God our families weren’t allowed to
worship. I thought of Jesus and how faith in him put love in the eyes of
those who believed. Even long after being gone, he helped people feel
better about life and who they could be. It was remarkable to me that
we had teachers like Jesus and St. Nicholas to help us be the best we
could be, but still, people could be greedy. At times, the holidays did
have the smell of hypocrisy, as everyone was not always so generous.
It would be nice to have Christmas every day of the year, not just for
the presents, but for our feelings when giving them. Still, I guess that
feeling special for one day was still better than not feeling special at
all.
After listening to Babushka Halina’s story on January sixth, we all
went to the church to honor the Christmas Eve celebration. Although it
was Christian, our church had a lot of different waysof worshipingGod.
For instance, in Ukraine, Orthodox Churches have no seats. Instead,
believers stand during the liturgies. Every time Tyotya Valya took me
225

VITALY
to church, she stopped me on the front steps, telling me to take off
my hat, cross myself three times, kiss the church entrance doors, and
then enter. Inside, there was more kissing to do, as I also had to kiss
the icon standing in the middle of the church, the bishop’s hand, the
sacrament bowl, and too many other things to count.
I always wanted to ask why we had to do all these things, and
Tyotya Valya always had the same answers, whispering fervently,
“You desecrate God’s name. He died for our sins, and you are born as
a sinner. You live as a sinner, and without redemption, you will die as
a sinner.”
I always thought she didn’t like me very much. Well, I guess she
didn’t like anyone, as she was always grumpy and complaining about
everything. Still, I had to buy a candle and kiss it before lighting it to
remit my sins. I didn’t understand the meaning of redemption, as it
wasn’t clear to me what I did that was so wrong that I should need to
redeem myself, but I followed the rules.
During the ceremony, Babushka Halina never took her eyes off me. I
was bored and struggled to stay upright as we stood for hours listening
to the liturgy spoken in the Old Slavic language. I didn’t understand a
word, although I tried hard to understand it and keep myself awake.
After coming to the church services a few times, I set a goal to read
the old Orthodox books that Babushka Halina brought with her from
her village to learn how to pray in the Slavic language. I always felt
empowered when I spoke the original language of the first apostles
and saints of the church.
After the sermon was complete,
Babushka Halina silently
approached me, sparking memories of a shadow from a long-ago
dream. Her motion was barely visible, like the movement of a rolling
cloud as she leaned to whisper in my ear, “You have evil sitting upon
your shoulders. That is why you get tired. In the church, the Lord
saves us.” Tossing a final glance at me, she frowned towards the spot
226

CHRISTMAS TRADITIONS
where I was standing. Uneasiness overwhelmed my limbs as I tried to
get the sound of her voice out of my head.
It lingered for some time, like the smell of incense that now filled
the room. Then, her cloud-like presence left me as we lit our candles,
and the church’s hall exploded in a pleasant blast of a hundred fireflies.
The room sparkled, purifying us as the choir started to sing, and one
by one, our voices joined the celebration. I loved the feeling of all the
different people, who were not more than strangers, coming together
to join their voices in harmony. At that moment, we were one word,
one faith, all sharing one song.
As the words of our carol sank into my heart, I realized that Babushka
Halina was a saint. Though she may sometimes seem old and resentful,
her anger wasnot about me. So I let the freedom fill my heart as I joined
the chorus, “On earth, peace reigns, and hearts filled with goodwill….”
That is when I remembered I was a part of something bigger, feeling
the power of belief coursing through the room, the city, and maybe
the whole world.
227

30
Carol of the Bells
Carolers in Kyiv, celebrating the Christmas Season.
W
HEN WE ARRIVED HOME, Tyotya Tyotya Valya had a lot
of work to do. During the Soviet occupation, Ukrainians
did not officially celebrate Christmas. The communist
government insisted they ignore it and celebrate only the New Year,
but people secretly kept their traditions. One of the essential religious
228

CAROL OF THE BELLS
customs we still celebrated was Christmas Eve dinner.
When we were allowed to attend church again, we did not each until
after the church services, as it was customary not to eat it until the
first star appeared in the sky. We did this to honor the journey of the
kings to Bethlehem.
Our Holy Evening or Sviaty Vechir began with a Holy Supper called
Sviata Vecheria.
The meal commenced by placing garlic at each
corner of the table. After the garlic, we created a centerpiece with
hay to symbolize the manger. After adding salt and a candle to the
centerpiece, Tyotya Valya set the dishes, adding an extra place setting
to remember those who have passed. The entire family gathered
around the table, waiting to dig in, but before anyone could eat, we
had to recite the “Lord’s Prayer.” I couldn’t help noticing that the
grownups were eager to start their dinner even though the children
were most excited.
Greek Orthodox homes prepared twelve unique dishes to honor the
twelve apostles as part of our Christmas tradition. The meal didn’t
have meat, dairy, or any animal fat. The only protein in the traditional
meal was fish. So, this time it wasn’t Valya’s stinginess that meant
we wouldn’t have meat dinner. It was the holiday.
I didn’t mind not having meat, as we had so much food to share.
One of my favorite things to eat was a traditional dish called kutya.
Kutya was the spotlight of our holiday dinner. Tyotya Valya prepared
hers with thick wheat, poppy seeds, raisins, walnuts, and honey, and
I loved eating it. We would usually eat it until the end of Christmas as
Tyotya Valya always made a lot of it.
Along with tasty kutya, there were other delights set out for us to
enjoy. Tyotya Valya put a lot of effort into making everything perfect.
We had pletenka, a bread roll woven into a braid and sprinkled with
poppy seeds. For drinks, we had uzvar, a sweetened compote style
drink made of a mixture of dried fruits. We also had mashed peas and
229

VITALY
beans. Two dishes topped with roasted onions. I didn’t like them very
much, but she made them taste good, so I ate them.
After the first round of courses, Tyotya Valya served cabbage rolls
stuffed with boiled rice, fried carrots, and onions. Atop those dishes
wasanother of my favorites, vareniki, dumplingsstuffedwithpotatoes
and mushrooms, cherries, or cottage cheese. We also had marinated
mushrooms, various salads, and then the dessert. The desserts were
often served with rose jam or sometimes with cherry or poppy seeds.
Finally, we finished the meal with donuts and cakes, though there
wasn’t much room for it.
Tyotya Valya didn’t move any dishes as she continued to bring more
to the table. When Masha asked why, Babushka Halina stared at us as
if she wanted to scare us with her next words, “The dead souls might
come tonight. They are hungry too. It wouldn’t be nice of us not to
offer them some food as we get our bellies full.”
That night, when we all went to our beds, I listened carefully to
hear if any hungry souls had come to eat the rest of our dinner, but I
didn’t hear anything. Maybe the souls were quiet, or just a figment
of someone’s imagination. Unfortunately, there was no way to find
out if they were there, as there were no dishes on the table by the time
we were up the following morning. I also knew it wouldn’t help to ask
Tyotya Valya if any food was missing, so it seemed, Babushka’s story
would remain a mystery.
On Christmas morning, everyone greeted each other with “Jesus
is born,” to which anyone would reply, “Glorify him.” Many people
greeted each other this way for the entire day and even a few days after
the holiday. The holiday spirit was present everywhere I looked, and
everyone seemed more cheerful than they were on other days. Maybe
it was the food that made them so generous. Perhaps it was that many
people took their vacations for the holidays, or it could have been the
good tidings going around in a big circle, reminding us that we are
230

CAROL OF THE BELLS
human, even if it was just for a couple of days.
As evening came, Slavik, Serhij, and I continued the tradition of
caroling we learned at the orphanage. I found a book called “Ukrainian
Koliadky” filled with dozens of celebration songs. We sang “Joy, Earth,
Joy. The Son of God was born” and “Good evening, Holy evening. To
good people for good health.” I didn’t know how to read the notes and
music sheets, but I tried to keep up with the lyrics, combining them
with what I remembered from years past.
Slavik and Serhij didn’t know the words to every song I knew. So, we
always began our performance with the tune that would bring people
to their doors with bright smiles to sing with us. Everyone in Ukraine
knew the world-famous “Shchedrivky” called “Carol of the Bells”
written by Ukrainian composer Mykola Leontovych and lyricist Peter
J. Wilhousky, so we liked to use that song to warm their generosity.
Hark how the bells,
sweet silver bells,
all seem to say,
throw cares away
Christmas is here,
bringing good cheer,
to young and to old,
meek and the bold.
Ding dong ding dong
that is their song
with joyful ring
all caroling.
One seems to hear
231

VITALY
words of good cheer
from everywhere
filling the air.
Oh, how they pound,
raising the sound,
o’er hill and dale,
telling their tale.
Gaily they ring
while people sing
songs of good cheer,
Christmas is here.
Merry, Merry, Merry, Merry Christmas,
Merry, Merry, Merry, Merry Christmas.
On, on they send,
on without end,
their joyful tone
to every home.
Ding dong ding… dong!
I felt warm inside as I sang those words for the hundredth time that
day. I was grateful for the donations we received. They were great
tokens of appreciation from the people. So, we enjoyed another long
tradition together, and I was always happy to get money.
I was a little upset sharing my money with Serhij and Slavik as I
was doing all the work, but I made peace with the situation as it was
nice having company. I was glad they were there to back me up since I
wasn’t sure if I would have enough courage to sing on my own in front
232

CAROL OF THE BELLS
of so many strangers.
A few days later, everything was back to the way it was before
Christmas. Babushka Halina returned home, Dyadya Grisha returned
to work, and Tyotya Valya was yelling again as we prepared to go back
to school. It seemed everyone was packing their smiles in some dusty
boxes to wait again until next year. Still, I wasn’t worried. My new
year was about to be the best yet.
After Tyotya Valya took my watch, I decided I needed a Christmas
gift of my own and had the perfect plan to get it. We loved going to
Uncle Lonya’s house best when we were caroling. So the one gift I
could say I received from Tyotya Valya was my Uncle Lonya. Even
though they were not related, Valya christened him and my Aunt Lena
as our godparents when we were still young.
I remember I was twelve and everyone else was eleven. It was a year
after she took us into foster care. She said she needed help to raise us.
So, Aunt Lena and Uncle Lonya were our godmother and godfather.
Uncle Lonya was always taking care of us. He would bring us money
to buy candy and babysit us when Tyotya Valya and Dyadya Grisha
traveled. He also owned a barbershop, and his wife Lena did our hair
for free. Aunt Lena was so kind to us. She loved to have us around, and
I often wished I could live with them instead of Tyotya Valya.
At Christmas, he would feed us until our bellies were full, and then,
he would give us extra donations for our songs. Thanks to Uncle Lonya,
I had earned enough money from caroling to buy my first television.
A friend of mine from school had a television he agreed to sell me
for fifty hryven. I was so excited by the deal. I bought it instantly. That
was the moment I knew I didn’t need Tyotya Valya anymore. If she
didn’t want to take care of me as a mother, I would care for myself.
With Slavik’s help, I carried the TV to our room. We did it secretly so
that Tyotya Valya wouldn’t see it. I knew she would try to find a way
to make it something to keep if she did.
233

VITALY
Of course, my secret didn’t stay a secret for long. As Tyotya Valya
called us to dinner, she looked into my bedroom, saying, “Where did
you get that?”
I could tell she was angry. I waited for her to accuse me of stealing it
or even punish me for having something she couldn’t take away, but
she just stood waiting for my answer.
“My friend gave it to me,” I answered defiantly. I didn’t tell her I
had money. I knew there would be a consequence if she knew how
much we earned, so we all agreed to keep it secret. Still, she couldn’t
let it go.
“Well, you won’t be watching it without my permission,” she shot
back. Her comment didn’t surprise me. She liked to monitor us and
control what we did. We often said she spent her days with her ear
to the wall, waiting for a reason to strike. It felt as though she heard
everything we said, even when we whispered.
At Tyotya Valya’s house, every step I took had been on tip-toes until
my birthday. That day changed me. Tyotya Valya could not control me
anymore. I didn’t respect her, and I couldn’t stand her telling me what
to do. So, I spent many nights hiding under the covers and watching
images float across the screen. I didn’t care that I had to have the
volume down or even when I was tired the next day. I loved having the
freedom to do what I wanted to do.
Tyotya Valya’s angry voice no longer overshadowed the Carol of the
Bells. The song rang loud in my ears all year long. I believe in joy and
positivity, and I knew I would find a way to be successful with the help
of people who cared about me.
234

III
Into Adulthood
Nothing in life is to be feared, it is only to be understood.
Now is the time to understand more, so that we may fear
less.
—Marie Curie


31
Much Needed Help
This is a high-school graduation picture. In Ukraine, we have the option
to continue to grade 11
or graduate after the 9th grade and attend vocational school.
N
EAR THE END OF SECONDARY SCHOOL, we got out of
the house to adventure with a social worker. As part of
the foster program, they invited us to visit the Vocational
237

VITALY
School just down the street from the same University Tyotya Valya
told me I could never attend.
Chernivtsi National University sat above Ukraine’s city on a natural
pedestal. It stood like a beacon of possibilities to Chernivsti’s young
minds. The University was founded in 1875 when Chernivtsi was the
capital of the Duchy of Bukovina. It is one of the best higher education
institutions in Ukraine, teaching around twenty thousand students a
year, and I was determined to be one of them. If I worked hard, I knew
I could impress them, and they would let me into their school. I could
build a different life than the cold and empty experience Tyotya Valya
believed Ukraine’s poor children deserved.
There was a marked difference between the University neighbor-
hoods and those around the orphanage on Fastivska Street. Chernivtsi
is a beautiful city full of hand-crafted buildings, cathedrals, and
colorful architecture. The city center shines brightly against the
monotonous slate gray boxes, where I began my journey. The tiny,
beat-up apartments stacked row by row in the city’s poorer sections
were a far cry from the new apartment given to us for being orphans.
Not only was our apartment better, but the streets near the University
were wide and clean, with buildings painted in many exciting colors.
The social workers guided twenty foster kids I recognized from the
orphanage to go on the field trip. Though some of us had passed the
school a time or two, we had never been inside. The architecture was
inspiring. The building was gigantic and divided into large classrooms,
much bigger than we had at our school. Though Chernivtsi was still
decades behind in fashion and technology, the education was top-
notch. Visiting the vocational school felt like I was joining the center
of the action, and I felt more inspired than ever to make the University
my way of life. We listened to the facilitators as they talked to us about
their classes and the fantastic career opportunities that awaited us
after attending their school. I knewthis waswhereI could pave the way
238

MUCH NEEDED HELP
for a life filled with success. My mind was spinning with possibilities.
While we were there, the social worker told us a generous donor from
Germany donated five hundred American dollars to split between us
to help us prepare for vocational school. It was inspiring to know that
the government wasn’t the only one sending money to support us.
Sometimes people from nearby countries like Germany were looking
for ways to help our little town. We were always in the middle of some
war or disagreement between nations. So they would offer money to
the orphans, especially during the holidays.
The holidays were full of generosity. Everyone had so much to give,
and for orphans, it was like a miracle every day. Of course, I wished
they would remember us other times of the year as well, but I was
grateful. Presents and donations like newshoes and coats alwaysmade
life a little better for us, and it was a treat to see they still cared, even
after we moved to foster care. Because of them, our bodies could be
warmer, and so could our hearts. I think that is what makes Christmas
so exceptional. Everyone gets to feel loved.
The social worker told us the people donating the money insisted
they give it to the children. So, the teachers didn’t want us to tell our
foster parents we had it. If our foster parents found out, I guess it
would be their money and not ours. It seemed like everything that was
ours wasn’t really ours. Tyotya Valya believed we had enough, taking
what she wanted. Still, it never felt like enough to me, so I was always
grateful for gifts when they arrived and was happy not to tell her.
When they divided the five hundred dollars, I got forty, like the rest
of the boys. The girls got twenty-three. I’m not sure why they got
less, but we didn’t think much about it then. It’s just the way it was, I
guess.
I was excited to have some money of my own. I didn’t have a good
coat, and the rain and snow always worked their way through the holes
in my shoes. It rained and snowed a lot in Chernivtsi. So I felt like
239

VITALY
I was always cold and had wet feet. On the worst days, I doubled up
on sweaters, wore as many socks as I could, and wrapped my feet in
plastic grocery bags before putting on my shoes. Now, I could buy a
coat and a new pair of shoes with this money. I was happy to have
relief.
Still, I didn’t just buy clothes with the money they gave me. I knew
that day I would be attending Vocational School. It was my first step
to creating a life of my own. So I also bought the supplies I would need
to attend the classes I wanted to take.
I left the school that day faced with a gray and cloudy afternoon. The
light outside wasn’t much different from most days in Chernivtsi, but
my life was looking brighter than ever.
240

32
Family Reunion
My brother and I met in Los Angeles many years after I came to the United
States.
W
E WERE ONLY DAYS INTO SUMMER, and Slavik and
I were already facing utter boredom instead of long-
awaited adventures. When we were younger, we filled
out our long summer months with camp activities, but that July, Serhij,
241

VITALY
Nadya, and Masha went without us. So, we had to make peace with
staying home and finding something else to do. The steaming hot days
seemed as though they would never end, and every time I looked at the
window, watching the sunset from my room, unwelcomed melancholy
nested in my chest, filling me with remorse even though there was
nothing to regret.
July and August eventually dragged themselves through the stone
streets of Chernivtsi, and I was somewhat at ease, knowing that
September would soon arrive. I was looking forward to getting back
to school and out from under Tyotya Valya’s constant watch. So we
spent as much of our time as we could preparing to apply to Vocational
School.
After taking our grades into account, we endured a lengthy applica-
tion process. My grades were worse during my final year of secondary
school. I could have made a hive out of all the Bs I had, but still, I did
far better than Slavik. So, he applied for Culinary Classes as a station
chef, which meant that, upon graduation, he would have the skills to
prepare food in general. He was learning to check food for freshness.
Then, wash, cut, peel, and create dishes that would look artful and
taste delicious.
I decided to enter the program to be a Pastry Chef. The courses I
took would qualify me to do what he did and more. I learned to create
appetizers, first and second courses, confectionery, beverages, and
desserts. I also learned the nuances of more refined flavors and smells.
On the first of September 1996, Slavik and I officially started
attending Vocational School. I knew I would enjoy attending Culinary
Arts classes, as I enjoyed helping around the kitchen. I was finally
looking forward to building my future, but I had no clue how it would
look.
Just as we began school, Yura, Tyotya Valya’s oldest son, returned
from military service. Growing up, I thought of him as my older
242

FAMILY REUNION
brother and was thrilled to see him again, but no one could be as
excited as Nastya. She was ecstatic to have her husband returning
after so much time away. Her entire body trembled as she occasionally
caressed the child she held, possibly trying to tell them that their
father was finally coming home.
I never thought our state system was fair as it required all boys
to give two years of their lives to military service after they turned
eighteen. I couldn’t understand their ability to force us to defend
ideas that weren’t even ours to protect. Still, it wasn’t the worst it had
been. When the USSR inhabited Ukraine, military service was more
demanding. The Russian Empire required twenty-five years of service.
Over time, the requirementsdropped to twenty. However, withthe end
of communism, a new law reduced it, requiring all twenty-year-old
males to serve at least two years in the military.
The patriotic spirit of serving their country brought pride to many.
Still, with the amount of abuse from the co-cadets and the leaders,
many young males did everything possible to avoid service. Some had
fake documents saying they couldn’t serve or bribed leaders to make
the requirement go away for them. There was always “a way out” of
the military service, but it came at a cost, which meant most of those
serving were poor. Yura, like many young men, had no other choice.
When Yura walked in the door, I looked at his face, wondering how
much he had changed during his service. He was taller than all of us,
hidden under a bush of wild dark hair. He was neatly shaved, had a
sizable nose, and wore a smile that beamed from across the room. Still,
I couldn’t concentrate on his face. Instead, I was distracted by how he
was breathing. His nostrils made a loud sound every time he inhaled
air.
Tyotya Valya was distracted in the other room, making lunch for us,
so Slavik and I were somewhat free to ask anything we wanted about
what it was like in the military. So, we gathered around him as he sat
243

VITALY
next to Nastya, asking everything we could think to ask.
Yura was controlled and cautious as he recounted what it was like to
be in a military camp. He didn’t give an opinion about what it was like
to serve two years away from his family. He told the facts.
I watched him closely, absorbing everything he had to say. I didn’t
like what I heard, and I couldn’t imagine myself holding a rifle and
rolling in the mud. I tried to imagine doing anything Yura was saying
until he spoke words that struck me like a clap of thunder, forcefully
dragging me from my thoughts. “Vitaly, did you know that your
brother’s wife is Nastya’s best friend?”
I opened my mouth, trying to give some answer, trying to acknowl-
edge that I understood his question, but I couldn’t make myself speak.
Finally, after several seconds of searching for words, I turned to
Nastya, “You know Roustam?”
She bobbed her head casually as if years of never telling me was
nothing to her.
“I actually met him during my service in the military, but I didn’t
have a clue that you made relatives of us….” Yura said, smiling. He had
the same casual air. It was like the relationship between my brother
and I meant nothing to any of them.
Nastya leaned forward, saying, “He wanted to see you, you know?
But when they transferred you to foster care, he wasn’t allowed.”
I was trying to piece together what she was saying. Why hadn’t I
heard this from anyone before? I knew it probably had something to
do with Tyotya Valya, but I didn’t understand why. At that moment, I
didn’t care. I had spent years setting aside expectations of my brother.
Still, I never stopped thinking about him, especially with everything
around me, reminding me how happy I was when he was in my life.
I remembered the day we had watermelon and how he gave me the
larger piece. I remembered when we went to the movies or sat on the
grass at the orphanage.
244

FAMILY REUNION
I missed Roustam every day, and now, I was finding out everyone
knew my brother. They were still spending time with him, but no one
told me.
“I could give you Ludmila’s number so you can get in touch with
him,” Nastya said compassionately. “I think he would be glad to hear
from you, as you two probably have a lot of catching up to do.”
“Really?” was all I could say. She was still very indifferent, and I
felt stupid not asking more questions, but I couldn’t make myself say
anything else. I can only imagine the look I must have had on my face.
Disbelief, fear, hope, and pain all pooled together into a moment of
utter confusion.
“Yeah,” Nastya was smiling, like the moment was an exciting
adventure. “I could get it for you. It would only take a second.”
“Yes, please!” was all I could muster. Joy overtook me. I could
almost feel it bouncing off the ceiling to radiate throughout my body
and make me forget all the years they kept him from me.
Nastya went to her room and returned, carrying a piece of paper in
her hands. She handed me the note with Ludmila’s number neatly
written on it, and as I took it, it felt like being given a piece of gold. I
couldn’t stop looking at it. I was reading the numbers, repeating them
in my head, afraid the digits might suddenly disappear if I diverted
my eyes, even for a moment.
I was sweating as I walked to Tyotya Valya’s room and dialed the
number.
I saw him not long after. He invited me to dinner with his new family,
but the experience wasn’t anywhere near what I hoped it would be.
“Hey, little bro!” he said, hugging me and tapping my back as I
walked in the room. My brother did seem happy to be reunited, but
the smile he wore held no reflection of the one I remembered.
Although I hugged him back, there was an odd feeling floating
around us like a mist of uneasiness that discouraged me. I felt like
245

VITALY
something terrible was about to happen, and as it turned out, I wasn’t
far from the truth.
“So, how are you doing? What have you been up to?” he asked me
impatiently.
I thought the impatience might signify his interest in me, but the
questions were just conversation starters. He didn’t even wait for me
to finish my answer before he started talking again. “So, our mother is
moving from that old apartment where I took you. Do you remember?
Well, I have to help her out with that. This new owner needs some
testimony for the government and the social workers, and since we
are both her sons, I would need you to back me on this.”
“To help you out with what exactly?” I asked, confused. I didn’t
know why he would need my help. I only ever saw my mother once.
What testimony could I give? It all seemed rather odd and unnatural
with Roustam’s entire family present at the dinner table. I wondered
if he was hoping that their presence would influence my answer.
“You see, for our mother to safely move into her new apartment,
which looks far better than her current place, by the way, we need to
testify in front of a committee… which is not even half as scary as it
might sound.” His smile was artificial, and his words anxious. He was
nothing like the brother I knew.
I stared at him for a moment, watching him pet the black poodle the
family had. I thought about how I never had a dog. It seemed I never
had a lot of things. I was frustrated, finally saying, “Sorry, but I still
can’t see my part in that. What is my role in her life, anyway?” I was
trying to remain calm, clinging to some common sense, which was
slowly slipping through my fingers in the face of what he was saying.
Roustam wouldn’t give up, insisting and trying to convince me that
he needed my help. In the orphanage, I had developed a weakness for
my brother. He was the only family I had.
Finally, I agreed to help him, but I knew I would never see him the
246

FAMILY REUNION
same way again. Like the day Tyotya Valya walked into my room with
that stick, my spirit left my body. I forgot everything about reasoning
and thinking clearly. I just wanted to move on with my life, “All right,”
I said.
On the day we went to the committee, Tyotya Valya told me she
would be coming with me. I didn’t trust what was happening. She
never came to support me in anything I did, and she never did anything
that didn’t benefit her. Now, when I agreed to help my brother,
she would be there, in front of the committee with me, listening to
everything I said. Something wasn’t right, but I didn’t know what it
was until it was too late.
The committee asked me various informational questions about my
mother that I didn’t understand. It wasn’t until Roustam testified that
I could finally see how everyone was about to gain something again,
everyone but me.
“So, you have agreed that it is in your brother’s best interest for you
to take care of him once he is out of the foster care program?”
“Yes, sir. I do.” Roustam shot me a look to remind me to agree.
There was a time in my life where that question would have meant
everything in the world to me, but now I understood what I was losing.
“Would you like to add something, young Vitaly Magidov?” one of
the committee members asked me.
“No,” I said plainly with mechanical coldness in my voice. “I agree
with Roustam.” I don’t know if I hoped they wouldn’t believe me or
not to trust a word I was saying, but I agreed. I didn’t know how to do
anything else.
The apartment our mother received from our testimony was more
considerable than where she lived before. She had her own bathroom,
hallway, bedroom, and a slightly bigger kitchen than her previous
apartment. So, it seemed she had gained something from our effort.
So, had Tyotya Valya. I didn’t have the same claim on my apartment
247

VITALY
as I had just an hour before.
Later, I heard various stories about how my mother’s previous
apartment owner promised to pay my brother if he could get my
mother to move. I didn’t want to believe the rumors. I wanted to
have faith my brother was the way I remembered him, as the one who
said he would always have my back. However, a few months later, I
saw Roustam pushing a new car down the road, a car he didn’t own,
before speaking to the committee.
I pretended I wasn’t there, that I couldn’t see him. I was disap-
pointed by my brother. He sold me out as if I meant nothing to him.
He treated me like I wasn’t his brother and as if my future didn’t count
at all. I wished he cared. I wanted any of them to consider my feelings.
But more than anything else, I wished I didn’t have to live with the
memory of seeing him betray me in front of that committee. That
was the day I saw who my brother had become, and it soured all those
sweet memories of my time with him.
248

33
Impossible Dreams
High-school Graduation picture. I am in the middle at the bottom, and
Slavik is on the second row
at the top left.
T
IME FLEW BY. STILL, nothing changed much around our
apartment. Masha, Nadya, Serhij, Slavik, and I were still
living together, and Tyotya Valya continued to find shouting
249

VITALY
and makingorders more comfortable than silence. As Slavik and I were
preparing to graduate from high school, the school asked everyone in
our class to gather money to buy chocolate and flowers for our teachers
to show our appreciation for their efforts. We also had to collect
money for class graduation photos to remember our time together.
Unfortunately, we didn’t have enough, which meant only one thing.
I needed to go to Tyotya Valya and ask her to give it to us, which she
didn’t like doing at all.
Since the incidenton mybirthday, Tyotya Valya didn’t bother talking
to me unless she had to. She even went as far as to get more involved
with the others to isolate me further and mark me as unnecessary and
unwelcomed. I knew she thought the situation between us was my
fault, just as I thought she was the one to blame. I could see we both
had our opinions. She thought, if she could keep me here for two more
years, our apartment would be hers. I looked forward to telling her it
was mine and that it had been since the day she hit me with that stick.
After several weeks of the kind of silence you only hear when passing
through a graveyard, I decided to take the first step towards talking to
her. She responded, but the answers, statements, and questions were
spoken mechanically and soullessly, without any sign of affection.
Things were never the same between us after that.
“Why do I always have to ask her?”
I asked Slavik, frowning.
“She would rather give someone her right arm than open her wallet,
especially for me.”
“But you know how to talk to her. She gives me that stare, and I don’t
even ask her what I want in the end! I get all sweaty, and my hands
start shaking. So, I just stand there, afraid to speak.” Slavik visibly
shook off the memory of trying to ask Tyotya Valya for something.
“I hate doing it as well. She is always so cold to me.” I tried to think
of ways to get out of it, but Slavik was relentless.
“Here. Let me put it this way. I have a candy bar that I got from
250

IMPOSSIBLE DREAMS
Oksana.” Slavik was smiling at me, trying to bribe me with chocolate
as if I were a ten-year-old. “It’s yours if you ask her to give us the
money for school.”
“Okay, fine. I’m going.” I couldn’t say no to him. Still, if I was going
to do it anyway, I might as well have some chocolate for my trouble.
I knew that he was far less comfortable than I was, so I pretended I
cared for that secret candy bar and smiled back at Slavik.
Earlier that day, Tyotya Valya had bought Masha a new pair of shoes,
a pair of pants for Serhij, stuffed the fridge and covered our dining
table with all sorts of fruits and vegetables. So, I knew she had received
the check the state sent her every month for taking care of us.
‘If I ask her now,’ I thought, ‘she won’t make a big deal out of it.’
Also, I knew that Tyotya Valya was in front of the television, watching
her favorite daytime drama, a novella from Mexico that became very
popular in Ukraine called “The Rich Also Cry.” Tyotya Valya loved it.
So it always put her in a good mood. Talking to her while she watched
it was my best opportunity for success.
I approached the door slowly, thinking of the irony of asking my
question during a show with a title that indicated life was not all
about money. But, of course, Tyotya Valya didn’t see it that way. So
I knew that I still needed the proper intro to boost her mood a bit. I
watched her for several minutes, trying to read her emotions from the
expression on her face. Over the years, I learned it was better to talk
to Tyotya Valya when she was in a good mood. So, I had mastered the
art of reading her temper.
She was enthralled watching the show, and once I saw her smiling at
the destiny of her favorite heroes and heroines, I knew that something
positive had just happened. So I took advantage of the moment and
entered the room to sit on the floor by the couch. The timing was
perfect as a commercial break was just about to start.
Tyotya Valya noticed me as I leaned against the sofa. “Is your
251

VITALY
homework done yet?” she asked with unquestionable authority. Of
course, she knew that I always finished my homework before starting
anything else, but I guess that was another way for her to state her
position.
“Yes. It’s done. I finished everything,” I replied, waiting for her to
ask about my day at school.
She didn’t say anything further. So, I tried to push the conversation
in that direction.
“We had some tests today,” I continued with a smile.
She wasn’t interested in what I did, but she looked as she felt
obligated to ask for details, “Yes? How did you do?”
“I got an A in literature and Bs in math, physics, and Ukrainian
language.” I was almost afraid to tell her about the Bs, but she seemed
okay with my grades if I didn’t fail. I sometimes felt she didn’t worry
about my work because she knew I was doing my homework and
was highly praised by my teachers when she talked to them at the
parent/teacher conferences. She only came to a couple of events, but
it seemed enough to satisfy her expectations.
“Great. You did fine. Way to go, Vitaly,” her tone was dry, like the
mechanical subway voice I saw in movies. Still, when she praised me
for my success at school, my lungs filled with pride. Even with her
yelling, I enjoyed Tyotya Valya’s attention. I always used her positive
reaction to my good grades as motivation to do better at school and
be among the best.
Her tone lifted a little as she continued, ”… and how did Slavik do?”
I knew that she didn’t have high expectations for Slavik as I helped
him with almost everything in school. So I wasn’t sure if I wanted
to talk about his achievements. Still, since she asked, I gave her the
most positive answer I could. “Lyudmyla Ivanivna told us that Slavik
is making real progress in algebra. He got a B- and she encouraged
me to continue helping him with math, so I think he is doing well.” I
252

IMPOSSIBLE DREAMS
was careful to keep a positive tone.
The conversation had gone as wellas I could have hoped, and I finally
had enough courage to ask her. So, I took a deep breath and just let the
words flow, “So, our class is collecting money for the group photo.” I
was breathing heavily with my eyes wide and blinking as I waited for
her adverse reaction.
“How much?” she asked coldly.
No eyes were rolling, and there was no shouting. My hopes began to
rise.
“Ten hryven.” It was equivalent to about two American dollars, so I
wasn’t asking for a lot.
“That much?!” She raised her voice a bit, and I could see her mood
shifting back to her usual hostility.
I became insecure again, but I kept talking, “But, as Slavik and I
wanted to have separate photos, that would mean that we need twenty
hryven to buy two….”
She was looking at me coldly, and I knew she wasn’t pleased with
my request. Even though the state gave her plenty to handle little
expenses, she never spent a dime on us if it was up to her.
She blinked, biting her lip. She didn’t have a good reason to decline.
I could tell. “I will leave twenty hryven on the dining table for you in
the morning before you leave for school.” Her voice was tense and
trembling uncomfortably. “But, don’t expect anything else from me
from this point on.”
My fears had come true. I knew that everything she gave us had its
price, and my price today was never to ask her for anything again.
The room went silent as Tyotya Valya went back to watching “The
Rich Also Cry.” I wasstill sittingon the floor, leaningagainstthe couch.
I felt like someone had glued my legs to the floor. Even breathing felt
uncomfortable. I wanted to leave, but I didn’t dare move. I didn’t
want to do anything that would give her a reason to change her mind.
253

VITALY
So, I stayed and watched the entire episode with her, trying to be as
invisible as possible.
When the show was over, I stood up and went to my room. I couldn’t
wait to tell Slavik that we had gotten the money and that his chocolate
bar was now mine.
“I can’t believe you did it! Did she yell?” Slavik asked.
“No. She was pretty much calm, as Tyotya Valya could be anyway.
Now, give it up!” I finally released the tension I was holding and began
laughing.
“Give what up?” Slavik asked.
“Your candy bar.”
“Oh. I thought you were not going to do it, so I ate it.” Slavik was
embarrassed. He could never help himself if he had candy to eat.
I started laughing, “I still want my reward.”
“All right! You can have my dessert on Sunday when we go to the
movies. Deal?”
“Deal!”
Two days later, we were back at school for our final day and getting
ready to take the class photo. Everyone already knew what they would
do after the ninth grade. Some of them decided to stay in school for
further education. Others thought it would be better to go to vocational
or technical schools, learning about computer science, electronics,
construction, and similar degrees. Zhenya decided to leave early and
go work in construction. It was our last day together, but I knew that
in advance, so I was ready for it.
Oksana, the clever girl from my class, wanted to study at the
University to become a math teacher. She was a brilliant and kind
creature and was always there whenever I needed her help, so it made
sense. I could see her being a teacher. She remained at school for two
more years to get her high school diploma, and then, she continued to
get her degree and follow her dream. All of my new friends were going
254

IMPOSSIBLE DREAMS
in their directions. I considered my options for a long time, and I was
already thinking about going to University like Oksana, but I wasn’t
sure.
While Dyadya Grisha was at work, Uncle Lonya and Aunt Lena often
visited us at our apartment for lunch or occasionally asked us to their
home. Tyotya Valya was a close friend with them, so she didn’t mind
their visits, and she probably enjoyed the break from cooking when
we went to their house as well.
It was only a twenty to thirty minutes walk from their house to ours.
So, after one of our visits, we decided to walk home. The road we took
led us through the University’s beautiful grounds. I was in awe of
the multiple buildings with different departments where they held
lectures on economics, business, history, geography, biology, finance,
and art. I was so inspired, I forgot myself and expressed my desire to
attend classes there to Tyotya Valya.
She laughed aloud in response, mocking me with her condescending
tone. “University is for rich kids, Vitaly. It’s no place for you. People in
high places go to University. Besides, even if you tried, they wouldn’t
let you in. It takes money to bribe the testing officials? You don’t have
the knowledge or money to pass those tests, and I’m not giving it to
you. You are my responsibility only until you are eighteen. After that,
you are on your own.
“For once in your life, be happy with what you have. You must learn
to accept life as it is, or people will think you are ungrateful. ”
Without even a pause, she turned to Masha, saying, “We need bread
for dinner.”
She always knew what to say to break my heart. She seemed to enjoy
reminding me that my dreams were impossible to achieve, planting
seeds of doubts in my mind. All I ever wanted was her love and
understanding, and she used that desire to hurt me, leaving scars
in me. I couldn’t help but wonder what she might do to someone if
255

VITALY
she ever had a mind to cause real harm.
She gave me the exact amount needed for the bread and sent me
to the store. As I continued down the street, I felt defeated, counting
each step as her words rolled back like a tape recorder in my mind. I
tried to think of anything but Tyotya Valya’s harsh voice, but she had a
way of drowning out everything else. Then, just when I felt I couldn’t
take one more second, I heard a familiar voice coming from my left.
“Hi, Vitaly!”
I turned to see who it was. It was Vanya, the boy from my building. I
was surprised to see him and replied clumsily, “Hey, Vanya! What’s
up?”
“I was wondering if you know what you are going to do after we
graduate. I mean, I am not certain what I am going to do. So, I wanted
to see if you felt the same.”
“I think I will stick around until ninth grade and then apply to the
Vocational School of Culinary Arts. I’m hoping to become a chef and
finish high school while getting my degree,” I replied, not knowing
what else to say.
I liked to cook the essential foods that Tyotya Valya usually made for
us: mashed potatoes, boiled pasta, fries, eggs, and some celebrational
dishes she made for birthdays and holidays. I also remembered the
various summer camps I visited. I spent a lot of time in the kitchen
with other chefs who were kind and willing to teach me some of their
culinary skills. They fed me well with various treats before other kids
could taste them, making it easy to decide what I wanted to do after
graduating from high school. It felt so good to have my belly full.
“It will give me a job I could enjoy as a profession and provide the
necessary skills to keep me full.” I continued, laughing. “What do you
think you will do?”
“A chef, huh?” Vanya said with an honest smile on his face. “That
sounds great!”
256

IMPOSSIBLE DREAMS
“Yeah, I guess it is something I could be great at, and as a big plus, I
will learn to find my way around the kitchen. Tyotya Valya wants us to
become self-sufficient and have enough money to support ourselves
when we become adults.”
“I will probably become a state lawyer,” Vanya replied, dropping
his head. “I mean, as my parents are so familiar with politics and law,
I would probably need to do one or the other, but I am more optimistic
about the law.”
“Really? But I thought you were going to become a surgeon. I
remember you talking about it with quite a lot of dedication.”
“Yeah. That’s true. I love doing good for people, and everything
related to medicine is so interesting, but my mother wants me to
become a lawyer. She said I would be able to earn a lot of money that
way.” Vanya frowned, trying to justify his mother’s motives.
I looked at the ground and back at Vanya. I wanted to do something
to help him. “Well, I hate to break your mother’s dreams, but I heard
lawyers were maybe earning big cash years back, but now there’s a
surplus in law. So, there aren’t many positions for that profession.”
“Really?” Vanya was surprised. I could see him rethinking his
options.
I paused, waiting to see if he would say anything, but he didn’t, so
I continued, “You know Natalia? Well, she finished Law School, and
now, after two years, she can’t even find a job.”
“Wow. I didn’t know that. Maybe I should reconsider my options.”
Vanya was surprised, but an expression of peace mingled with the
previous disappointment on his face, letting me know that he was
content with the information I was giving him. He paused for a
moment, looking at me as if he were still listening to statistics or
contemplating another argument. Then, it clicked. I saw it. His face
lit up as he continued, “Well, thanks, buddy! Thanks! Really! Bye,
Vitaly! See you around….”
257

VITALY
He raced away like he knew his direction, the light of conviction
shining in his eyes.
“Bye, Vanya…and good luck!” I replied, leaving in the opposite
direction to buy bread for Tyotya Valya.
I believe my conversation with Vanya helped him see what he wanted
in life, but it also helped me. So why would I let Tyotya Valya talk me
out of my dreams if I didn’t want Vanya’s mother talking him out of
his?
My conversation with Vanya reignited my desire to attend University
and get the degree I wanted. Tyotya Valya’s words would have the
opposite effect of what she hoped and decided that she couldn’t hurt
me anymore. I would use her judgment to increase my desire to study
and be better so I could be one of the people who had vacations and
ate meat on more than just special occasions. Education was my
opportunity. Knowledge would give me freedom, and no one could
take school or the opportunity it presented from me, not even Tyotya
Valya.
I would show her my capabilities, and she may not be happy to see
me go to University, but I would go anyway. This was a chance to show
her what I could do without her help. I would go to Culinary School,
but I would not stop there. I would go all the way.
The next time we decided to walk home from lunch with Uncle Lonya
and Aunt Lena, I knew I would not just attend classes in those beautiful
buildings. I would get a degree from that University, as well.
258

34
Vocational School
I spent a lot of time in the kitchen practicing to be a chef. Mariya
Omelyanivna is located at the back wearing the long, narrow hat with a
stripe on the bottom. I am in the front, on the left,
sitting with two of the six boys we had in our class.
E
VERYTHING ABOUT TAKING CULINARY ARTS differed from
what I had experienced so far. At Vocational School, there was
259

VITALY
no lining up to meet our teachers. We watched welcoming
lectures held by several instructors instead.
Before we headed to the welcoming, I met everyone in my class, and
then we went together as a group to watch the lectures.
Our principal Yuliya Dmytrivna was the first to speak. She always
made us do better than we thought we could. No one dared ask her a
single question or even whispered during her class, and I could swear
that some of us didn’t even dare to breathe loudly. She was strict and
criticized us when we made mistakes. Still, as she taught physiology,
hygiene and sanitation, I realized that she made sure that we learned
everything we needed to know to keep the people eating our food safe
and healthy.
It was almost impossible to get an A in her class. Still, I knew for
some reason that I could talk to her, and she would not mind. I could
tell she appreciated my efforts and noticed I studied because I was
always willing to speak up while learning. I was never afraid to say
what I felt, even though I was usually the only one who did.
Our principal wasn’t the only one who expected the best from us.
I had the most formidable teacher I ever met while taking culinary
arts. Her name was Mariya Omelyanivna. Most of the students were
afraid of her, but she never scared me as much as she challenged me.
She yelled when we made mistakes, but she always made her classes
enjoyable and taught us well. Though most students said it was hard to
get a B in her class, I always aimed for an A, and I got it. As I remember,
I was the only one in her class who had ever gotten an A. Of course,
she made me work for it, but I always admired her because she was
helping us grow.
Over time, we became close. Mariya oversaw all of our education.
She made sure we understood the hygiene lessons we learned from
Yuliya Dmytrivna and knew how to apply them in the real world. She
taught us everything related to cooking. We learned to make dishes,
260

VOCATIONAL SCHOOL
wash pots, clean the kitchen, bake and cut meat. During Mariya’s
lessons, we would cook for the entire school the whole month. We
all had a turn at practicum, having a chance to use our knowledge at
that school’s dining area. Mariya’s job was to set us on the right path
towards getting our degrees.
Mariya understood the conditions I was living in, and she did
everything she could to help me be successful in school. I appreciated
her immensely.
I knew the teachers here expected the best of us, but they were
willing to give the best in return. So, as my classes began, I decided to
focus all my attention on school instead of thinking about the things I
wanted to change in life but couldn’t. Instead, I chose to look forward
to the new skills, new people, and new knowledge I was gathering to
build a life of my own, away from Tyotya Valya.
Soon after our first year at vocational school started, they put us
to work practicing the culinary arts. There were only six boys in the
group, including myself. The rest were girls, almost twenty of them. I
was not used to being around so many women at one time. I wasn’t
sure what to do. Most of my schooling separated boys from girls, and
if the school didn’t do it, our interests did.
Though I got along well with all the boys in my class, I didn’t
appreciate one boy I met named Sasha. I would have been fine if he
was never in my class. He was a cocky boy who was always trying to be
the best. Usually, that wouldn’t be a problem, but Sasha was always
bragging that he was the best at everything, and he wasn’t. From
what I saw, he excelled at cutting meat, and that was all. Of course, he
usually worked cutlery since he was good at it, but I thought he should
notice that he only did one job well and not believe he was better at
everything he did.
The only thing that made me want to tolerate him was that Oleksiy
worked in cutlery with him. Oleksiy captured my attention instantly
261

VITALY
with an enchanting smile and almost contagious laughter. He made
putting up with Sasha worth it on most days.
I got out of my bed at four a.m. every day, so I could be in the kitchen
by five and start making dough for baking bread and rolls. Mariya
was already there beating dozens of eggs with sugar, salt, and other
ingredients when I arrived.
“Vitaly, I already started the mixing. I want you to knead the dough.”
“Yes, Master.” Each day, we fed over three hundred students and
various bakeries, and many of the kitchens we used for practice didn’t
have automatic dough mixers. So I kneaded the dough by hand. With
so many mouths to feed, I felt like I was becoming an expert. I was
also getting strong. It wasn’t easy, but mechanical action helped me
clear my mind and loosen up a bit, even if it was for just a couple of
hours.
When Mariya saw how well I was doing with kneading and baking,
she decided to put me in charge of the baking department. She also
sent one of my classmates, Nelya, to help me. I was glad to have Nelya
by my side as I always thought she was the cutest girl in our class.
There was something about the way she observed things. Her eyes
glowed like she saw even old and boring stuff for the first time.
Over time, we developed somewhat more of a personal relationship,
and I pretended to be her boyfriend. There was something attractive
and amusingabout playingmake-believegames, and this wasa chance
for me to show everyone how I could have a pretty girl to be my
girlfriend.
She always blushed a little as she came in, seeing me there mixing
ingredients.
I smiled at her. Being her boyfriend felt like having another best
friend like Slavik, “Good morning, Nelya.”
“What are we making today?” she asked playfully.
As I got to work with someone I liked, baking came easy, and
262

VOCATIONAL SCHOOL
kneading the dough soon became an unconscious act. The better I
grew to be, the faster I was, and the dough was starting to look and
feel better as well. After waiting for the yeast to rise and a little more
kneading, the most exciting part of the process would come when
Nelya and I would make it into different shapes. We had three patterns
we used, but Nelya and I often finished our work before noon, so we
spent a lot of time expressing our creativity and trying things we
hadn’t tried before. Nelya was not just cute but was very creative with
dough. I liked her adventurous spirit.
“Let’s see. Yesterday, we made trees and flowers. What if today we
tried making animals?”
Nelya smiled, “Yes! What do we want to start with?”
“How about a bear?” I answered, excited to try something fun. Of
course, we had made animals before, but I always liked a challenge,
and so did she.
“Wow! That’s a good one. Okay, let’s see who makes the best bear.
Go!”
I giggled as we played with the dough. It was a new experience for
me to have a girl as a friend, but it was excellent. She was sweet and
never wanted anything more from me than holding hands or a kiss on
the cheek. Plus, I could invite her to dances, and we would do things
together that Slavik and I couldn’t do.
“Nalya,” I stifled my laugh and returned to kneading as Mariya
approached. “I want you to finish the dough. Vitaly, I need you to help
in cutlery.”
“Yes, Master!” Nalya and I spoke in unison.
Mariya didn’t stop to record the confirmation. She just gave us the
order and moved on to her next task. On days Mariya was in, she would
sometimes send me over to the other departments as an extra pair
of hands. I didn’t mind preparing vegetables and meat for lunch and
dinner, but I wasn’t always comfortable when she would send me as a
263

VITALY
messenger. Passing on her assignments wasn’t hard itself. I would
always start the sentence with, “Mariya asked me to tell you…” which
worked for most stations, but going over to cutlery where Sasha was
working was never pleasant when I had to tell him what to do.
Sasha and Oleksiy worked together at the meat department, and
they got along well. However, I felt mixed emotions whenever Mariya
sent me to help them. I liked to see Oleksiy and often watched him
from across the kitchen as he worked. So it was exciting to spend time
at his station, but Sasha created tension for everyone, and as he liked
to be the only one bossing anyone around, I knew he would make it
difficult for me to enjoy myself.
“Hi, Vitaly!” Oleksiy’s smile made me smile in return.
“Hi, Oleksiy… and Sasha. How are you today? Mariya sent me to
help.”
“Good. Prep the fish,” Sasha said, never acknowledging my greet-
ings. I knew he wouldn’t, but I insisted on giving them anyway, even
if he gave me the fish. I didn’t appreciate working with fish, and Sasha
knew it. Still, it was his department, so I did as he asked. I scraped
gills and scales and cleaned the workstation afterward, which was
even worse. The scent wasn’t as pleasant as the freshly-baked bread I
enjoyed at my station, but I did what I needed to do and was grateful
for the opportunity to do it.
I learned a lot and mastered many skills in the kitchen with meat,
fish, vegetables, bakery, and more. I knew I would need every skill
to pass the final culinary exams, but I think the thing I liked most in
the kitchen was the family I was growing there. I wanted more than
anything to be a successful chef and now was my chance to do not
just that but have new and exciting relationships. These relationships
would eventually change my entire perspective of life.
264

35
My First Job
I am sorting and cleaning the vegetables and fruits for cooking at the
summer resort.
E
VENTUALLY, ALL OF US WERE ATTENDING Vocational
School. Nadya and Serhij went to the construction vocational
school, whileSlavik and I took culinaryclasses together. After
about a year, Masha joined us. She applied to become a candy maker,
265

VITALY
which suited her very well, as she loved eating candy. I also felt like she
needed it most as she was so skinny some of our teachers thought that
she didn’t get enough food from Tyotya Valya. Getting accepted to the
Confectionery Courses was easy, so she started soon after applying.
It was nice having both Slavik and Masha in school with me. They
helped me with my confidence and inspired me to be surrounded by
the people I love.
As part of our culinary training, we also worked in a restaurant.
Slavik waited tables while I bussed and washed dishes. I also took
every opportunity I could to make food. My favorite part of my job
was when they let me make dinners, prepare the salad, and even eat
sometimes. Still, not everything was perfect. Periodically, they would
send me out of the kitchen when there weren’t enough waiters, and
I hated it. I would rather wash three sinks of dishes in vomit-like
water than serve. I was worried about spilling on someone or serving
them the wrong food. I didn’t know if they would be aggressive or
verbally abusive for poor service. In the kitchen, no one saw me, only
the success of my creations.
Slavik didn’t care much about what people thought. He liked being
a waiter because he didn’t want to get food on his hands or clean up
after others. In addition to culinary classes, Slavik was also attending
modeling school. So he did everything he could, never to feel like a
busboy in front of the girls there.
Overall, getting experience in a restaurant was great for both of us.
We learned how to make a lot of great food, but we also learned what
it takes to make a restaurant successful, but it was more than that. We
were building a whole new life at Vocational School.
I worked with teachers who were always happy to help me with my
studies, and the students enjoyed spending time doing fun things
between classes. Nelya and I were good friends working side by side in
the bakery, and I was getting to know Oleksiy though I wanted to know
266

MY FIRST JOB
him better. I thought about Oleksiy a lot. I loved watching him from
across the kitchen and became so excited when he brushed against
me on the line. I liked to try and match when he was in the backroom,
changing into his chef coat so I could be with him. Everything about
him inspired me, but I never told him. I watched and pretended that I
didn’t feel the way I did. I couldn’t risk it.
I knew we wouldn’t be in Vocational School forever, and Slavik and
I needed to make our plans for the future. As they were still doing
everything they could to help us, the social workers also introduced
Slavik and me to Olexiy Nikolayevich. He owned the Cherniy Piven or
Black Rooster restaurant, where we eventually started to work during
our internship. He was a good man and wanted to help people. He first
met Slavik through a fund that helped orphaned children. So Slavik
worked as a waiter. I asked if he could help me get a job, too, as a sous
chef. They agreed to let me work for a trial period, but I proved myself
and ended up staying for a year or more.
When we started, he gave us money to buy clothes, and then we
worked as interns. He paid us a little each month. He didn’t need to.
The fund was there to help us learn skills, so he could have had our
work at the restaurant in exchange for what we were learning, but he
didn’t want us to work for free. When he did well, he shared. It was
barely enough to pay the utilities, but we were grateful.
Besides having the job, the chefs always made delicious meals for us.
We would have soup or maybe a quick sandwich at lunch, but we had
food as good as the restaurant guests at the end of the day. Mykolaj
was the head chef in our kitchen. His mother graduated with a degree
in Electronics Engineering but then left the field to join her son in the
kitchen, where she advanced to a chef position. Vera was a little strict,
but she and her son Mykolaj made excellent meals together.
Knowing Vera had changed careers and still became so successful
made me realize I could do anything I wanted. Mykolaj taught me the
267

VITALY
same, but it had less to do with success and more with vodka. I was
still seventeen when I had my first drink, but it carried forward into
how we lived life. It was the way everyone in Ukraine lived.
I still remember the day. It was late, and we were tired after catering
a big banquet for sixty people. It was common for us to sit down and
eat leftovers after a big job. We still had a lot to do, but we all enjoyed
having a break and some food after a long day of serving, and I was
happy to be away from Tyotya Valya. Some nights I would sleep on a
bench at the restaurant, so I didn’t have to go back to her apartment
at all.
Mykolaj and his mother, Vera, owned a big dalmatian dog that they
would bring to the restaurant on the nights I stayed to keep me safe
and entertain me while I did my work. I usually put food away in the
evening, and the rest would wait till morning.
That night, I sat at a table counting tips when Mykolaj sat across
from me, pounding a bottle and two small glasses onto the table in
front of us. “Here, Vitaly. You’re man enough to have a drink with me.
Especially after a night like tonight.”
He poured about a finger’s worth of vodka into one of the glasses.
The liquid was as clear as its container. It rippled, reflecting the
dimmed lights of the kitchen as it settled in the glass.
When I took my first drink, I hated it. It was bitter, and it burned like
a river of lava. I felt it run down the back of my throat and through my
chest to settle in my belly. I coughed and even gagged a little, passing
the glass back to him.
He laughed in response, “That’s not how you drink vodka! So, here,
try it again, but this time close your nose and gulp it. So, you don’t
taste it.”
“Why am I drinking it if I don’t like the taste?”
He laughed for some time before he answered, “Because it feels
good.” Then, he threw his head back, downing the contents of his
268

MY FIRST JOB
glass in one swallow before filling it again.
I followed his lead and the burn soon spread to make me feel warm
all over. He was right. It did feel good. I guess he was the one who
prepared me for even longer nights and parties with my friends at the
vocational school. We spent many late nights cleaning the kitchen and
having family dinners. I knew family dinner didn’t mean spending
time with our families. Most of us were at the restaurant for so many
hours we barely saw our houses. Family dinner was when we all
gathered in the kitchen and shared leftovers from that night’s menu.
The family meal was my favorite time of the day. The food was
delicious, better than any I had. Tyotya Valya was an excellent cook,
but the food we served at the restaurant was for people who had a lot
more money to spend on dinner, and it was exquisite. Still, it wasn’t
just the food I liked. The food was always good, but the company of
friends all working together was even better. It felt more like a family
than any family I had growing up as an orphan. Except for with the
friends who traveled this sometimes difficult road with me, I had never
been allowed to laugh and talk and sometimes even sing at the dinner
table.
I was grateful that Slavik and I had a chance to spend our time
together in the restaurant. It was good to know I had people I trusted
and who knew they could count on me, but now we also had friends
at the restaurant and the vocational school. Our friendships were
growing just as I knew they would when we finally found our way out
from under Tyotya Valya’s ever-present thumb.
269

36
Valya’s Greed
With my foster family as an adult. Left to right: Luda (Slavik’s wife) with
Slavik,
Tyotya Valya, Serhij, Sasha, and me.
M
Y YEARS ATTENDING VOCATIONAL SCHOOL passed
quickly. Before I knew it, the flower buds were already
opening, spreading a good mood to everyone. I loved
270

VALYA’S GREED
spring, and although it hadn’t rooted itself yet in Ukraine, March 8,
1998, was a remarkably fresh and sunny day, giving a glorious hint to
the coming season.
Spring always made me dreamy, and since it was Women’s Day,
I also wanted to make it exceptional for Tyotya Valya. Much like
Mother’s Day in the United States, we celebrated honored traditions
every year. All the women in our home enjoyed a day off while the men
did all the work. Though I often felt we did a lot of work every day, it
was a special gift to give them the day off.
My life changed when I moved into foster care, but many of my
habits remained the same. I still found the intimacy I could and
continued the discipline I was taught to embrace, which meant
following the rules Tyotya Valya taught. I think she appreciated my
efforts, especially on Subotnik.
Having a family made Subotnik easier. The entire family would
gather and get to work, cleaning grease out of the kitchen, dusting,
and scrubbing so everything would shine and glow for the next couple
of days. It was a never-ending cycle of unwanted commitments
from cleaning the toilet and bathroom to dusting, doing dishes, and
washing clothes.
The kitchens in our new apartment lacked the
familiar smell of grease stuck on the walls and ceiling, so there was
less scrubbing, but we still had much to do.
One day cockroaches attacked our kitchen. The issue started with
one bold adventurer running across the floor like a rocket. Still, we
didn’t realize how bad it was until the morning came, and we turned
on the lights earlier than they expected. We had a massive invasion of
tiny legs running for their hiding spots. Tyotya Valya sprayed poison
on them and made us clean the kitchen every day, paying particular
attention to every corner.
I knew Women’s Day would be a lot like those days. We had a lot
of work to do. Still, I wanted to do something memorable for Tyotya
271

VITALY
Valya. As I was attending culinary classes, I decided to make one of
her favorite dishes to celebrate her day; fried potatoes with onions,
eggs, and sausage chunks. I was cutting, stirring, and frying most of
the morning. I thought of presenting my gift to her the whole time,
imagining the look she would have on her face when she saw what I
had prepared for her. However, unlike my dreams of the mesmerizing
spring day, the reality of who Tyotya Valya was didn’t change,
“What have you done?!” She screamed as she burst into the kitchen,
just as I put the finishing touches on the dish I prepared and decorated
for her. She frowned instead of giving me the smile I always hoped I
could get from her, “What were you thinking? Look at all this mess!”
As it was Women’s Day, I was planning on cleaning the kitchen for
her as well. I hoped to do it while she enjoyed her excellent breakfast,
but she didn’t give me time to explain the gift. Her rage grew instead,
and I could feel that she was about to have another hysterical attack.
“Now, I have to clean everything!!!” She yelled, trembling in anger.
“The boy just wanted to make something nice for you, Valya,”
Dyadya Grisha said quietly.
She didn’t listen. I don’t even think she heard him. When Tyotya
Valya thought something, that was it. Nothing could change her mind.
I didn’t cry while she stood screaming at me, and I didn’t say
anything as there was nothing left to be said. I wasn’t angry at all. I
just felt cold inside and rigid, like something had died in me.
Everything was quiet in the room around us as I calmly waited for
her to finish. When she did, I quietly walked to my room and sat on
my bed. Then, moving my pillow slightly, I retrieved a handwritten
card I made to celebrate Women’s Day and thank Tyotya Valya for
everything she had done for us as a mother. I opened it, thinking
about everything I had in mind when I made it for her. Then, I closed
it and put it back where it belonged, under my pillow. I never gave it
to her as I didn’t want to get the same awkward reaction or feel acid
272

VALYA’S GREED
bubbles boiling in my stomach when she rejected the words I created.
Later that day, Dyadya Grisha brought her flowers and champagne.
He knew how to please her. His five minutes at the market made her
happy. She loved his gift. I spent hours. I could have spent days, but
she already decided she would hate anything I gave her. From that
first day, when I asked for a second piece of watermelon, she never
forgave me for that, for wanting something more than she was willing
to give.
For years, I hoped living with Tyotya Valya would finally be like
having a mother, but she never thought of us as her children. I
remember asking her and Dyadya Grisha if I could call them Mama and
Papa not long after moving in with them. Their answers were vague,
with Dyadya Grisha saying nothing and Tyotya Valya saying, “If you
want to, I guess you could, but we would have to live together longer.”
I was so excited for the day to come where I could use those words, but
it never did. Tyotya Valya never said, “Yes,” and eventually, I stopped
asking.
I spent my entire time with her trying to please her, making every
day her day, which usually meant being unseen and asking for as little
as possible. I was afraid to ask her for anything, even the things I
needed. Instead of asking her for food when I was hungry, I would sit
with a jar of jam and a spoon to eat under my bed. When I asked for
money to buy supplies for culinary exams or confectionary classes,
she made it as if I did nothing but take from her.
Early in my first year of culinary classes, I asked her for a few hryven
to get ingredients. She responded with acid-spitting from her mouth,
“Two weeks ago, you asked me for help, and I gave you some money,
and now you’re asking again. I don’t know what they do at that school,
that they expect poor parents to pay so much.”
“But Tyotya Valya, it’s only a couple of hryven,” I was asking for
less than a dollar, but still, I was careful with my tone. I didn’t want
273

VITALY
her to think I was demanding. I was hoping maybe she would see it
was not much money.
“I told you this would happen. School is for rich people, and we’re
not rich. I told you that from the beginning. They only give me a
hundred hryven a month to feed you. I also dress you and pay utilities.”
She expected me to do wellin myclassesand sometimes complimented
me when I was successful, but she didn’t care anymore if it had to do
with her giving money. She only cared about my grades when she
could use them to punish me. If my scores were ever low, it was “No
television until your grades are better.” Still, she didn’t think of that.
She just kept going, “I just gave you money last week for your test.
You need to figure it out for yourself. I can’t keep doing this.”
She alwayswent back to the same excuse of being poor, but she never
made efforts to change anything. I didn’t want to be poor and struggle
my whole life like the people in my family. I knew that if I wanted to
succeed in life, I needed to take advantage of the opportunity in front
of me and learn as much as possible. It was a risk, but I decided to keep
going, “You didn’t give me money for that test. You said you didn’t
have it to give.” I was all in now. Tyotya Valya remembered every time
she spent anything on us, but she never remembered when she said
“No.”
I wassilent for a moment. I knewI wasplayingwithfire, but I needed
the money to take my tests. So, I wasn’t ready to give up. It was my
last chance to make her understand. I needed to go as far as I dared.
When I spoke again, I was pleading, “My grades won’t be good if I
can’t pass my exam. I know how important my grades are to you.”
It was a thing she could not argue. Still, when Tyotya Valya thought
something, that was it. Nothing could change her mind. So she
responded the way she always had when there was no reason to refuse.
Anger boiled in her response, “Don’t talk back. I help you every chance
I get. You are ungrateful.”
274

VALYA’S GREED
That was it. I knew it was over. That was the last day I ever asked
Tyotya Valya for her help. Some parents will tell their children, don’t
ask again because they are upset, but they don’t mean it. When their
children come back to them for help, they give it gladly. Aside from
the single serving we were allowed at each meal, Tyotya Valya never
gave me another thing.
I knew I needed to make a meal to show my culinary skills to my
teachers and everyone in my class. Every student had the assignment
to cook the meal as a final exam for graduation. Nelya often asked if I
wanted to make meals with her throughout the year, and she would
supplyfood. I was grateful. We did many meals together, but I couldn’t
ask for her help all of the time. So, I talked to my teacher, trying to see
if there was another way for me to pass her class.
Maryia understood my situation and helped me by providing ingre-
dients for my exams. She also invited me home and fed me sometimes.
She gave me pickled food and jam to take home and hide in my room.
I will always be grateful for the teachers in my life who were kind to
me, being the parents my parents weren’t willing to be.
As I grew, I learned the kind of person Tyotya Valya was. She believed
she was the one who had sacrificed for us, and we would never be able
to do enough to pay her back. She spent all her time searching for the
next advantage, regardless of who she used. She exchanged children
like they were a commodity to be bartered, returning them to the
orphanage when they weren’t what she wanted. Then, every step we
took was an insult to her. Our meals were a gift to her, though they
paid her to feed us. We owed her for living in apartments that belonged
to us. Everything she had was because of us, but she resented us for it
instead of being grateful.
Before we turned eighteen, she knew she would need to do some-
thing to get the apartment from us. So, she divorced Dyadya Grisha
without letting anyone know to get another apartment. They stayed
275

VITALY
together, but their marriage was not sacred to her, not if she could get
something for herself. We never knew about the divorce until the time
came for us to separate and live independently. We found out about it
when she had to sign papers for each of our apartments.
She also used my relationship with my brother to try and take
my apartment from me. I don’t know how involved she was with
Roustam’s plan to sell my mother’s apartment, but she had taken
advantage of it. I was so surprised to discover that Nastya had known
my brother all those years I lived at Tyotya Valya. Tyotya Valya must
have known about him, but none of them said anything until Roustam
needed me to testify, and then she was there, watching and waiting
for her chance to strike.
When they placed us in Tyotya Valya’s care, she told us that we would
only live with her until we turned eighteen. After that, we needed to
find a place to live and survive without help. I knew that wasn’t true.
The government program Tyotya Valya used promised each orphan
an apartment. But, of course, it didn’t work that way when the time
came for us to take over. Tyotya Valya worked her magic and found a
way to make what was ours, hers again. Slavik, Serhij, and I received
one two-bedroom apartment when we turned eighteen. Masha and
Nadya received another two-bedroom, but it was much smaller than
ours, and Valya kept the other three for herself. With Rulan’s help, she
convinced a committee that I didn’t need anything, that my brother
would be taking care of me. Then, she took one apartment for her
husband, one for herself, and one for her children, saying that she had
earned them by taking care of us.
If I hadn’t helped my foster siblings register and obtain passports
to prove residency when they were sixteen, I’m sure we would have
been in the streets. Unfortunately, I lost my right when I testified for
Roustam, so Tyotya Valya had her way against me. Still, legally, I knew
four of the apartments should have been ours, but there was no point
276

VALYA’S GREED
arguing with her. Some of Ukraine’s poor people adopted children not
because they wanted a family but because they would get money and
apartments. Tyotya Valya was one of those people. She was always
right and would look out for herself and her children first. So, I let it
go.
I will alwaysbe grateful to Dyadya Grisha and Tyotya Valya for giving
us something better than the life we had at the orphanage. Still, they
weren’t a real family to us. I never did find the kind of family I knew
we deserved, not from Valya. She never accepted us, not as a mother
should think of her children. We were a means to an end for her. Only
my friends and teachers were my support, but never anyone to call
Mama. My mother wasn’t it. Roustam wasn’t it, and Tyotya Valya
definitely wasn’t. So, I gave up faith in them, but I didn’t give up on
myself.
My whole life, the person who took the best care of me, was me, and
I was beginning to believe I could do anything. Though I never stopped
wanting a real family to give me the love I knew I deserved, I decided
to end my constant searching for them and focus on my achievements
instead. I knew I could be successful. So I concentrated on my studies,
excelled in my classes, and decided to take things into my own hands.
And who knew; maybe, in the end, I could use that success to create a
family as well.
277

37
Girls
This is my beautiful girl, Nelya, who was my best friend. This picture was
taken
spending time together at the Primorsk resort.
O
UR LAST DAYS OF CULINARY SCHOOL WERE NEAR. We were
all getting ready for our final internship at the beautiful
Primorsk Resort near the Azov Sea.
This trip was our
278

GIRLS
last opportunity to gain practical skills and apply the industrial,
educational, and undergraduate learnings we acquired through our
three years of study at the Vocational School. After taking our final
test to perform professional work, we would all get minimum wages
for the first time.
Everyone was looking forward to the upcoming summer because
most of us had never been to a summer resort. We underwent a
lot of necessary medical check-ups and preventive narcological and
psychological examinations to prepare for our internships. We also
had to get a passport, a copy of the document on education, a copy of
the registration number on the taxpayer’s account card, and a copy
of the internship employment contract with the timeline of how long
the employment would last.
I knew it was important to be ready early rather than late. Things
could change, and I didn’t want to risk not having everything prepared
for an exciting summer with my friends. A nurse at the vocational
school who was like a friend to me helped me get all necessary medical
documents without paying a penny out of pocket for those tests. She
helped me schedule blood and urine tests. She also had connections
that moved me to the front of very long lines at various medical centers.
I was grateful for her help. I don’t think I could have made it without
her, knowing that Tyotya Valya wouldn’t help me pay for anything.
I’ve heard, “it is not what you know, but who you know that matters.”
I guess I was going on with life without realizing that relationships
were essential to get things done.
This year, eighty-five students were going to practice professional
skills at various recreation centers. My group went to the Primorsk
Resort, a recuperative climatic resort in the Mariupol region. I didn’t
know much about Mariupol, the Azov Sea, or the summer resort where
we would spend our internship. Still, I was excited to travel away from
Chernivtsi. Our journey began by taking a twenty-seven-hour train
279

VITALY
ride through Kyiv to Mariupol. Our master Mariya Omelyanivna came
with us.
The Azov Sea is an inland sea in the Atlantic Ocean basin connected
with the Black Sea by the Kerch Strait between Ukraine and Russia. It
is the warmest in Ukraine and the shallowest near Primorsk Resort.
Arriving there was nothing like being in Chernivtsi. Trace elements
and mineral salts saturated the air, inspiring people worldwide to
spend their summer vacations there. The resort’s guests enjoyed
relaxing by the sea and visiting museums, temples, and churches.
We worked fourteen-hour shifts to ensure the tourists had their
freshly made healthy food every day. Then, after a hard day working
in the kitchen, we spent our night having fun like any other night after
work. Because we worked only one day and had the next day off, we
knew it would be a day we could do whatever we wanted.
We spent most of our day off at the beach. We would sometimes go
sightseeing or hiking, but we would usually swim or sunbathe. Then,
after an enjoyable afternoon, we would go to someone’s room, so we
could drink, talk, and maybe play a few games.
One night, a few of us decided to play Durak, or The Fool, a card
game where the first player lays down a card. After their turn, the next
player tries to beat their card with a higher card. If the next player is
unable or unwilling to top the exposed card, the defender has to pick
up the cards. We continue until the person with no cards is declared
the winner. There were maybe ten of us in all, but the people who
made the night most memorable for me were Slavik, Oleksiy, and two
girls from our group, Olena and Leeda.
I got used to being around many girls at the vocational school. Some
of them were nice to be around, like Nelya, but sometimes other girls
weren’t as sweet. Olena and Leeda were two of those girls. They
wore tight dresses, lots of makeup, and flirted with everyone, even
their teachers. In geography class, Olena liked to tighten up her bra
280

GIRLS
and show a lot of cleavage to get good grades. She was not afraid
to misbehave because she knew that Anatoliy Panasovich, like many
other teachers, enjoyed it and would let her pass their classes.
I tried to be nice to them, but I didn’t like that they were troublemak-
ers, and I wished they didn’t have to be with us tonight. They laughed,
making fun of me and trying to get me to respond to their silly sexual
comments. I tried to go along with them sometimes or pretend I didn’t
care. I didn’t want to look like a fool or give any impression that it
was okay to joke like that, but I was also afraid of having my secret
discovered by not responding to their jokes. So I tried to stay as far
away from them as I could.
“Hey, Vitaly,” Slavik said, pulling all of the attention to himself. He
loved enticing people with his stories, and I was grateful to have the
girls’ attention on him when he did it. “Remember when we had that
broken couch at the apartment, and we had to sleep in the room with
Tyotya Valya and Dyadya Grisha. The room was so small, and we all
somehow fit in it, but it came with its consequences.”
I began to laugh, knowing where he was going with this one, “Slavik
and I slept in a room with Tyotya Valya, Dyadya Grisha, and their three-
year-old baby while we were waitingfor Dyadya Grisha to fix the couch
where we would sleep. Sometimes, Tyotya Valya said she could hear
Slavik or me fart. She would wake up the next morning, saying, ‘Last
night, you boys made me think that there was an earthquake!’ We
would all laugh so hard about it, but I don’t think Tyotya Valya thought
it was that funny.”
“Yeah, Vitaly and I farted most of all the kids. Tyotya Valya probably
regretted putting us on a couch in the same room where she tried to
sleep. I wonder how she didn’t suffocate from our farts.”
“The food she cooked for us is what most likely created the gas,” I
added, laughing. It was primarily carbs, no proteins, and fats. “If you
think about it, it was a problem she created for herself.”
281

VITALY
All the boys were laughing. Slavik was laughing so hard he was
almost crying. “Well, to be honest, I was happy to know we caused
her problems with our farts, especially when she was angry with us.
Being angry seemed to be her favorite daily activity, but we got even
at night.”
Everyone burst into hysterical laughter at Slavik’s last statement,
except the girls. They stood up and left for the adjoining room. I
thought maybe they needed to use the bathroom. I know girls like to
do that, go to the bathroom together. Or perhaps it was because we
were talking about farts. Girls didn’t seem to want to talk about farts
as much as boys did.
I didn’t pay much attention to what they were doing. I was kind of
glad they left. All I wanted to do was watch Oleksiy, with his bright
eyes and perfect smile. I wished I could be alone with him, just the two
of us, so we could talk without everyone else having so much to say.
I liked Nelya, and I wanted to like her more, so I tried. I dreamed
of having a family of my own, with children I wouldn’t abandon, and
Nelya was the perfect girl for that. We did many things together, and
I thought of her as my girlfriend, but I wasn’t sure what that meant.
I never knew how to act like a boyfriend, so I mostly thought of her
the same way I felt about Slavik, like a best friend I wanted to be
around. She wasn’t with us tonight because she didn’t like to drink,
and even though I liked her, I wasglad. I washappy not to be distracted,
pretending to be her boyfriend. I wanted to put all my attention on
Oleksiy and build a friendship with him as well.
“Vitaly,” I turned from my thoughts of Oleksiy to see who had called
me. The girls had been gone for a while when I thought I heard one of
them calling me from the bedroom,
“Vitaly, come in here. We have something to show you.” I could
hear them talking and laughing. I didn’t want to go, but Slavik and
Oleksiy were deep in a conversation about the game, and I didn’t want
282

GIRLS
anyone else to notice I was avoiding them. So, I went to see what they
wanted.
Olena was sitting on the bed topless, and Leeda called me from the
door, “Come here, Vitaly. Come and sit with us on the bed.” They were
drunk and smiling.
I smiled back, nervously looking between them and the door, not
knowing what to do. Unfortunately, I didn’t have a chance to decide as
Leeda decided for me, pulling me into the room and closing the door
behind me.
“Don’t you like us, Vitaly?” Leeda’s bottom lip stuck out, reminding
me of a kid I knew at the orphanage who used to pout like that when
he wanted something from the teacher.
I was afraid she would tell everyone there was something wrong
with me if I didn’t agree to sit with her. So, I decided to stay while my
brain turned in circles, figuring out what to do.
The moment I sat down, Leeda started to undress me, taking off my
t-shirt while Olena removed my shorts, leaving me in the swimsuit
I wore that day at the beach. I sat, mostly confused, letting them do
what they wanted. I didn’t know what else to do. I knew they flirted a
lot, but I had never seen girls do this before.
Olena started rubbing my chest, saying, “I feel like you don’t like
us, Vitaly.”
“Of course I do,” I said. I didn’t want her to feel like I didn’t like
her. They were popular in our class and beyond. If I showed any sign
of dislike, they would tell everyone, and word would travel quickly. I
would be embarrassed in front of the entire group.
“Then why don’t you touch me?” she asked, reaching over to grab
my hand from my lap, “You haven’t even tried to kiss me.”
I didn’t respond. I didn’t know what to say. The only girl I ever
kissed was Nelya, and that was just on the cheek as her friend. I never
kissed anyone else, not how she wanted me to kiss her, and I didn’t
283

VITALY
know how to do it.
“Have you ever kissed anyone?” It was like she read my mind, or
maybe my silence.
“No,” I said, a little embarrassed.
“I’ll show you how she said…if you want.”
I didn’t want to hurt her feelings, but I didn’t want to kiss her either.
I wasn’t sure what to do, so I said, “Okay.” It was what I had to do.
She smiled, “It’s easy. I’ll show you,” and that’s what they did. They
showed me what to do.
Olena started kissing me, and she kissed Leeda on her lips, too,
occasionally looking at me to see if I liked it. Step by step, from the
moment her lips touched mine, I mostly just followed her lead. When
she opened her mouth, I opened mine. When her tongue came out,
so did mine. I didn’t know where to touch her, but she showed me. I
didn’t know what I was doing, but I just did everything she told me to
do.
I remember her soft skin, like worn cotton just before you rewash
it, and she smelled like lavender. I didn’t feel bad touching her, but
it didn’t make me feel good, either. I didn’t really feel anything. I
noticed the way I felt when I was with Zhenya or when Oleksiy stood
next to me on the line. I didn’t hate touching her, but I wasn’t excited
either. So, I didn’t go out of my way to try.
They noticed I wasn’t doing much, and my body didn’t respond the
way they wanted. So, Olena pushed me down on the bed and sat on
top of me, rocking her hips. I think I was supposed to like what she
was doing, but I didn’t, not the way she expected.
She paused, trying to put together the pieces of my rejection.
“What’s wrong, Vitaly? Are you uncomfortable with the two of us?
Are you too inexperienced? Would you like it better if just one of us
stayed?”
“Ummm, actually…”I tried to think of what I could say. The more
284

GIRLS
the girls wanted to excite me, the more I wanted to leave. Then, it
came, “I can’t stop thinking of work. Mariya said she needed me to
do something I forgot to do. I need to do it, or she will be upset, and I
don’t want to fail school.“ I jumped from the bed and got dressed. I
needed to get out of the room before they realized what was happening.
So, I rushed away, saying, “I need to go.”
I didn’t go back to the party. I was frustrated, and I didn’t want
them confronting me. I could only hope they weren’t upset enough
to say anything to the group. Everyone wanted me to enjoy what just
happened, and I even tried to enjoy it. I wanted a family to love. I
wanted a wife and children I could love the way my family should have
loved me. I was trying so hard, but it just didn’t feel as good being
around girls as I did being around boys.
I examined my feelings, trying to understand them. I tried to face
my demons and fight against them, and I prayed a lot, asking God to
help me. I asked Him to take away my cravings and purify my heart. I
wanted to be a good person, and I hoped the Lord would help me find
a way. Maybe He could help me create the family I always wished to
have. I hoped it could happen one day, but I didn’t know how or when.
So, I did what I could. I still had some time before I needed to worry
about marriage, and I had Nelya by my side teaching me how to be
her boyfriend. I also had the goal of going to University. Then, maybe,
when I had a good job and a home of my own, I could think about
having a family. I still had time to be saved while working on my
future and the opportunities ahead of me. Then, when I was ready,
God would find a way to help me be worthy of the family I always
dreamed of having.
285

38
New Life and Loss
I am standing toward the back and showing off my Red Culinary Arts
diploma. Mariya Omelyanivna, my Master Chef, who taught me
everything, is in the front just behind the beautiful flowers our group gave
her to thank her for helping us succeed.
I
WORKED HARD TO FINISH my culinary internship and was
so excited when I completed my final exams and received my
286

NEW LIFE AND LOSS
Diploma. It read:
Magidov Vitaly Vasylyovych
successfully completed the program for the training of Pastry Cooks
at Vocational School No 10, Chernivtsi,
September 1, 1995 - June 30, 1998.
Based on the recommendation of the State Qualifications Board of June 24,
1998,
he is awarded this Diploma to certify that he is qualified
as Pastry Cook Fourth Class.
Because I was a valedictorian, I was the only one in class to receive
a red diploma. The rest of the class received blue or green. The
educational government agencies colored our credentials to recognize
how successful we were in our studies. Like everything else still
lingering from the time we were under Soviet rule, red indicated the
highest level of achievement.
While attending vocational school, I received Certificates of Honor
for active participation in the school’s social activities. I also won
educational Olympiads in math and physics, where we competed
against twenty-seven other non-technical and technical schools. In
both competitions, I took first place.
I wasproud to see that myhard workpaid off and gratefulfor the help
of great teachers and instructors throughout my life. I also appreciated
that our government supported higher education initiatives. It gave
priority to orphans and children of less fortunate families. They
wanted us to succeed, and I had proved I would follow through with
every advantage they gave me. I was going to prove that my brother
Roustam and Tyotya Valya were wrong about my capabilities. I would
succeed, even without their support.
Because of my success, I didn’t have the normal application process
287

VITALY
to attend University. Instead, I had to gather recommendation letters
from various organizations and attend a single interview to prove I
was prepared to handle the University courses.
I had a pretty easy time gathering my letters, but I wanted to do well
in my interview. So, I did everything I could to prepare. It was my
one chance, and I wanted to ensure I made no mistakes when I took it.
So, I studied all I could, and even though I always did well in math, I
never thought it was anyone’s favorite subject. So I decided it might
be helpful to get a refresher course to prepare for the meeting.
Masha, Serhij, and Nadya were a grade beneath me in school, and
they had a teacher who was also a math tutor. I decided she was the
perfect person to help me pass my interview. She was so helpful and
offered additional tutoring hours to them for free that I hoped she
could be my tutor as well.
Zoya Yakivna taught every student with such love and passion I
thought I had met the best teacher in the world the first time I sat with
her. But, I had no idea how much she would change my life.
I remember the first time I visited her old two-bedroom apartment
near the city’s center. Zoya lived in a walk-through room at the front
of the apartment with her husband and in the last room lived her
daughter-in-law, Tanya, with her two children, Arthur and Susanna.
The apartment had high ceilings, so high I couldn’t reach them, but as
with many people in Ukraine, the two families shared one tiny kitchen.
Still, Zoya’s family welcomed everyone to share the little they had.
I met with Zoya several days a week as I prepared for my meeting. I
loved being with her. Besides her excellent math knowledge and years
of experience knowing how to study, she was also kind and would
invite me to eat with the family when I was there. I was so grateful
for the food and the time I spent there. She knew about my family
situation and did all she could to help us. She helped Serhij and Nadya
get good grades and was pivotal in helping me get accepted to the
288

NEW LIFE AND LOSS
University.
I loved everyone in Zoya’s family and soon became close friends
with Tanya. Susanna, Tanya’s youngest, loved to play around me,
and Arthur kept me engaged with his smartness and talents. Arthur
was young and very bright. He spoke Hebrew that he learned at
school, studied violin, knew tons of useless facts from the World
Encyclopedias, and could also play the piano well for his age. Though
he took classes for the violin, he had learned to play piano on his own,
only by listening to others. I became enthralled the very first time I
saw him play. I wanted to learn to play the piano, just like him. So, I
often stayed after dinner to take lessons. He was young, but he was
still a good teacher.
Besides just the family, there were often young men from Tanya’s
church who would meet with her while I learned all I could from Zoya
and Arthur. Many of the young men were very cute and spoke with an
accent. So I spent as much time at their house as possible, but I didn’t
get to know anyone but the family until Tanya began inviting me to
attend Church Sacrament Meetings with her.
Though I began following atheism early in life, from the commu-
nistic laws, I became more involved in the Russian Orthodox Church,
now known as Ukrainian Orthodox, when I lived with Tyotya Valya.
Though I continued to live as before, guided only by my desires, I
alwayswanted to understand why it is necessary to do some things and
not others. If something is forbidden, why is it that way? Who decided
what we should do? I received only vague answers saying, “It is bad, or
that society will not accept it.” Still, none of the explanations satisfied
me. So I continued to wander in the dark and did not understand how
I had to live to please God.
The information I absorbed from television, radio, books, and
magazines said it is necessary to take everything from life. I learned
we should seek fortune and achieve success in society. Still, behind
289

VITALY
all the hustle of society, we live, and we could die at any moment.
So, I wondered, “What is the purpose of human life?”
Was I to
follow the rules to achieve success in my next life, or should I pursue
everything to have success now? This issue became acute, standing
before everything else in my mind.
I was going to Baptist School family gatherings for Bible study. I also
studied with the Seventh Day Adventists at the time. I loved reading
my Bible and committed to reading it every day for an entire year
until I knew most of the Old Testament stories by heart. I met with
Pentecostals, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and others. I also talked to all sorts
of Evangelicals. Chernivtsi had over a hundred different Christian
organizations I could research. It seemed that maybe other people
were like me and looking for answers and eager to adopt beliefs after
the USSR’s fall allowed them to do so, and I was ready to keep the
discussion with anyone who would have it.
Zoya and her familycame to me withsome interestinganswersto my
questions. When I met the family, I was studying the New Testament,
and I could remember most of the scriptures I was reading by heart,
but I was always hungry for more. One day, Tanya asked me if I was
interested in attending The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
(LDS Church). She gave me a missionary pamphlet that summarized
the plan of happiness and details about The Church. It also provided
the address where the Sunday meeting would be.
I agreed quickly. I was excited to try it, even though my Babushka
Halina, Tyotya Valya’s mother, always said, “Orthodox means ‘to
praise God correctly.’ The Orthodox Church has passed the keys to
praise God correctly through generations of tradition from the early
apostles. We must follow those keys. Whoever is not an Orthodox
Christian is dangerous and evil.”
I was not like most Orthodox Christians, so I decided to go to Tanya’s
church. The LDS Church was still establishing itself in Chernivtsi, so
290

NEW LIFE AND LOSS
it didn’t have many people yet or a building. So we took a trolleybus
to the space The Church rented for Sunday Meetings.
Three people met us at the entrance door as we arrived. Two of them
spoke English and a little broken Ukrainian. They were so accepting. It
seemed that I had come to visit old friends who were very happy to see
me. Inside, everything was simple. There were no icons, decorations,
candles, or crucifixes for me to kiss.
It felt so foreign to me. I didn’t know how to act, but Zoya’s family
was there to help me. After the Church Meeting, Tanya invited me to
their home for lunch. I was happy to join, but first, I told her to go
ahead of me because I had something I needed to do.
Every time I went to the LDS Church, I ran to the Cathedral I passed
after to place a candle at one of the altars. Then, I said a quick prayer
asking God to forgive me for changing the way I worshiped him. After
my penance, I always felt relieved and at ease, knowing I had made
peace with Him before heading to Tanya’s home for a nice lunch.
After lunch, we read scriptures, discussed more questions, and
Arthur and Tanya performed a musical number for all of us to enjoy.
Arthur played the violin while Tanya and Susanna sang together
a spiritual song they learned in another church when they were
members there. I was so grateful for all the new people in my life.
I felt blessed to have everything I needed, and I gave credit to God.
I must have made the right decision to have all this love in my life.
Among all the difficulties I still faced, I also had many blessings, and I
gratefully recognized each one.
As it came time to celebrate the New Year, I decided to spend it with
Tanya and her family. We spent the night joined by a couple of the
young men from Tanya’s church. We played American games like Uno
and Skip-Bo. After our fun, when the young men left, I stayed to help
them prepare dinner.
After dinner, Tanya read from the Book of Mormon and the Bible
291

VITALY
until midnight, when we joined the celebration.
We began our
celebration with a prayer and then followed some of the New Year’s
traditions until two or three in the morning. That is when Zoya shared
with me the story of her son, who had died. We didn’t drink that night.
I wasn’t used to having parties that didn’t include alcohol. Still, I felt
grateful I had spent the time with them. I preferred reading the Bible
and feeling uplifted.
The following day, more church members came to Tanya’s house,
and we continued our festivities. The best thing was, we woke up
feeling good with no headache or stomach upset to bother us, and we
continued to praise God for our blessings.
Zoya’s family included God in everything they did, every day, the
way I always thought it should be. We started and finished almost
everything we did with a prayer. I loved spending time with Tanya and
Zoya. They always made me feel like family, but I still had a family of
my own, as well. So, my holidays were busy, going from one family
to the next, enjoying the many people I had in my life to love and be
loved.
I spent Christmas with my sisters. Then, I returned to visit Tanya
that night. Again, she invited several church members to dinner and
caroling at the homes of other brothers and sisters from The Church.
However, this time, instead of asking for donations, we brought candy
we had made to lift the spirits of those who needed our visit the most.
After caroling, we returned to share a dinner of kutya. Next, we
shared a traditional meal of potato dumplings with our porridge and
cabbage rolls, filled with rice, meat, fried carrots, and onions, wrapped
in cabbage leaves, and boiled until the leaves became soft. We also
had a regular salad de-beff, a meat salad made with cubes of cooked
sausage, potatoes, carrots, green peas, and onions mixed in mayo.
Finally, Zoya prepared her favorite apple pie and rose herbal tea, made
of rose flowers, dried tulips, and mint leaves to finish the meal.
292

NEW LIFE AND LOSS
Tanya said she couldn’t have the tea. She would let us do what we
wanted, but she never strayed from her commitments to The Church.
The LDS Churchhad a doctrine called the Word of Wisdom that inspired
its members to live healthy by choosing not to drink black tea or coffee
and avoid unhealthy food. Tanya went far beyond what The Church
taught her. She decided that it was not just any black tea that she was
not supposed to drink, but it included every beverage with any caffeine.
Even though the tea we drank was herbal, she knew that giving anyone
the impression that she drank black tea would lead others to think
that drinking tea was okay. She said it would be contradictory to what
The Church taught.
I saw Tanya as a saint and wanted to learn all she knew about The
Church and its scriptures.
With my many New Year’s blessings, there were also significant
losses. After graduating from the vocational school, I went to see
Tyotya Valya and wished her well for the holidays. Unfortunately,
Tyotya Valya told me that Babushka Halina had passed away when
I arrived. I was sad, and I knew I would miss her. I was always so
inspired by how hard-working my Babushka was. I would often walk
the six miles to her village to see her. Even though she was well over
eighty years old, she would still take the time to teach me how to make
bread, chop wood, and gather water from the well.
Babushka was the one who invited us to go to church and pray for
the Christian holidays. She wanted me to be an altar singer, but Tyotya
Valya made it impossible. However, I did still love to go to the services
with Babushka. She was strict, but she was also the one who inspired
me to keep learning about every Orthodox saint and memorize many
prayers for specific occasions. Whether it was for Christmas, Labor
Day, or someone I loved, she taught me that every prayer had its
purpose. She also said that praying the prayers in the original Slavic
language had more power than translating them. So, she inspired me
293

VITALY
to learn them and the Bible in the old language, helping me pray in
the most powerful way I could
As I left Tyotya Valya’s apartment, I thought of Babushka Halina’s
visits and how Tyotya Valya would make our favorite delicious cake
baked with condensed milk and honey dough. I knew I would never
have cake with my Babushka again. No matter how much my life
moved forward, I lost the things I loved as well. I guess the answer
to finding joy in life is to enjoy the things that make you happy while
you can. You don’t know if they will be there to make you happy again
tomorrow.
294

39
The One Who Loved
As children we all have dreams and as adults, we can’t help but wonder
what life would have been like if those dreams had come true.
I
LOVED HAVING SPECIAL PEOPLE IN MY LIFE, people like Slavik,
who were part of my every day. When I was at the orphanage, I
felt that way about Martha. I couldn’t remember a day in my life
where she wasn’t there until the day came that she was gone. Nobody
295

VITALY
knew why, but one day, there was suddenly an empty place where
Martha once stood. I didn’t know how I processed it. I knew other
orphans might leave. Families adopted them, or they became adults
and left, but as far as I knew, Martha had always been there, and in
my young mind, I assumed she always would be as well.
Her absence left a massive gap in my chest. I missed her terribly. I
missed her warningglances and how she called out my name whenever
I did something wrong. She knewI couldn’t resist pushingthe limits of
my educators’ patience, and Martha was severe sometimes, punishing
me when I went too far. Still, I never doubted her compassion. She
truly loved and cared for us.
I remember one day, as I was testing my courage, I decided to climb
onto a window ledge and try balancing with only my feet. I was barely
stable, teetering on the windowsillwithmy arms outstretched. Martha
entered the room right as I decided it was a good idea to see if I could
stand on just one foot. She froze for a moment, looking at me as
though she might be having a heart attack.
I froze as well, knowingthat she wouldpunishme, but she didn’t. We
stood there for a moment, just staring at one another. Then, Martha
rushed forward to pull me down from the window ledge. She didn’t
say anything. Once I was on firm ground, she let go, and then she left
without a word. I stood stunned, hearing her call for another teacher
to take care of me as she continued down the hall.
A few weeks later, she was gone for good. It was as though the earth
opened and swallowed her, taking her away to where no one could find
her. I wondered if she died or just another person who disappeared,
like my mother. Then, one of the other teachers told us she quit and
started teaching in another school. They said she missed us but was
happy there. I don’t know if I ever reconciled her leaving. After that,
everyone seemed to be going places they weren’t taking me.
Though I didn’t particularly appreciatate living under a communist
296

THE ONE WHO LOVED
regime, there were many generous benefits to it. Communism was
about people sharing their homes and everyone taking care of each
other. The tradition of sharing carried over even after the fall oYears
a Union. Even years after graduating, teachers and students kept
personal relationships alive, as I did with the orphanage and some of
my teachers there.
Shortly before I started at the University, we visited Martha at her
new job. Her eyes filled with tears when she saw us. She told us she
often checked on us as if she was still our teacher. My chest filled with
an overwhelming sense of peace, and my mind flooded with memories
of Martha. I don’t think it was until that moment that I realized how
much I had lost. She was always proud of us and happy to see us doing
well.
As our visit neared its end, Martha took me aside and put an arm
around my shoulder, leaning her head against mine. “Vitaly,” she
spoke my name with a warmththat confirmed everything I knewabout
her. “I want you to know something,” she said, “I want you to know
that I always wanted to adopt you.” Her eyes glistened with tears
she tried to hold. “I wanted to be your mother, but circumstances
were different than I hoped they would be. I didn’t have the means
to support you. The only thing I had to give you was my love and
attention, but children cannot live solely on their mother’s love. They
must be fed and clothed as well.”
I didn’t know if Martha was correct or not. I would have traded
all the clothes and food I didn’t have for just a parcel of that moth-
erly love—images of how my life could have been with Martha as
my mother flashed before my eyes. Growing up at the orphanage,
surrounded by so many parentless children, the only thing I ever
wanted was to be loved and have a family of my own. Martha was
probably the closest thing to a mother I knew.
Martha continued speaking, and my dreams of what might have
297

VITALY
been evaporated into the thick air of a sunny afternoon, “At least I
can say, my dear boy, that I was the one that found the family you
deserve.”
I always wondered why Tyotya Valya and Dyadya Grisha chose Slavik
and me to live with them. Had Martha done that?
She was smiling, “You see, I knew how much you wanted to have a
family of your own. So, when I couldn’t give you one, I found one for
you. When one of the foster families we work with came to us looking
for children to take home, you were the one I recommended.”
I couldn’t speak. I just looked at her, speechless, my eyes wide.
“And, my dear Vitaly, when I saw they were considering you, which
meant that you would be leaving the orphanage soon to join your
new family, I knew your dreams came true. So, you didn’t need me
anymore.”
Martha gave me a family. Even when she wanted to be my family
but couldn’t, she ensured I had one anyway. I could not move or blink
for a few moments, as I couldn’t believe how much love Martha kept
for me behind her wrinkled, often angry face.
“You did that for me?” Her gesture impacted me. I can’t imagine
how much worry I gave her.
“I would do even more if I could. You know you were always finding
some way to get detention or worse. But when I saw you climbing
on the window ledge that day, I knew I couldn’t bear it if something
happened to you. So, I had to leave, and I knew I could go with some
peace of mind if I helped you find the family you wanted. You deserved
to have a family of your own. I knew how much it meant to you.”
“I don’t know what to say…”to merely thank her seemed like not
enough. Forgetting the distance between us, the manners we used at
the orphanage, forgetting everything, I hugged her, and she hugged
me back.
“Vitaly, please, don’t share this with anyone. I could…”
298

THE ONE WHO LOVED
I nodded, stopping her words. My heart beat madly in my chest,
spreading warmth throughout my body. I blinked hard, trying to
prevent my tears from falling. Again, I wished I had my mother’s lap
to cry on, but that wasn’t the case, so I swallowed the bitter lump stuck
in my throat and remembered Martha’s kind words instead.
We said “Goodbye,” and I left, thinking about what she did for
me, eternally grateful that I had a chance to be nurtured by such
an exceptional woman. If someone like Martha was in the world so
willing to give such unconditional love, maybe I could believe again
in possibility. Perhaps it didn’t need to be me on my own. It could be
that the family I deserved was still out there waiting for me.
299

40
University
The main entrance to Chernivtsi National University, founded in 1875.
T
HE PROCESS OF GETTING INTO The University was complex.
Our typical admission process involved taking entry exams
related to the subject you were studying. Typically, the
application process for an Engineering Degree required all applicants
to take math and physics exams.
However, because I placed
300

UNIVERSITY
first during the Math and Physics Olympiads and graduated from
Vocational School as a valedictorian, they offered me a place in the
program by merely speaking with the Dean of the Physics faculty.
The Dean, Mykhaylo Stepanovych, was eager to learn about my
background. He checked the letters I brought with me and asked why
I was applying to the Engineering Program. He reviewed documents
from the various government agencies stating that I came from an
orphanage and foster care. He also read teachers’ recommendations
and my valedictorian diploma. The Dean was happy with our conver-
sation, and at the end of our interview, he asked me if I could start in
the fall.
On September first, 1998, I was accepted to The University of
Chernivtsi to pursue my microelectronics and semiconductors degree.
Finally, my dream to learn at a well-established school came true. I
was almost crying when I discovered I was accepted because Tyotya
Valya’s words did not come true. They fueled the desires of my heart
instead. To be admitted to The University without growing up in a
wealthy family or paying money to anyone was a success I created
myself.
When I first began preparing for University, there was a lot of
competition to get accepted into the Computer Science field I first
considered—four people applying for one seat. So, I decided to pursue
electronics and engineering because it was more readily available, and
I was still interested in doing it. As a child, I was amazed by electronics,
always trying to create something that had a life of its own. I was
innovative and passionate about technology and entrepreneurship at
a very young age. I knew I could be successful at anything by taking
the opportunity to use my technical abilities.
While at the Vocational School, I had a great Computer Science
teacher who taught me a lot about electronics and fixing televisions.
With his help, I used the computer to program in BASIC language,
301

VITALY
assemble computers, and convert a regular black and white monitor
into a television. Though Tyotya Valya didn’t like it when I brought
equipment home, I tried to learn everything I could, quietly hiding it
from her eyes.
Going to University was very different from attending a vocational
school. We had nineteen girls and only six boys during vocational
training, and now, at The University, we had nineteen boys and only
two girls. Another thing that changed is the number of classes we were
taking, and a lot of them seem to be more challenging, taught to us at
a faster pace. I barely had enough time to digest new things.
The subjects that I found interesting were much easier for me to
study. Ukrainian universities offer diverse educational opportunities,
so we didn’t study specialized subjects for very long. Besides math
and physics, I could also learn art and other topics unrelated to my
preferred profession, such as economics, history, and philosophy. The
main reason for that is because the educators believed it was essential
to have a well-rounded education. So, if someone wanted to switch
from physics or math to an economics degree, they could easily do so.
I never had problems deciding what I wanted. We had a lot of
subjects, and I knew how to use them. Still, it was hard for me to
manage all of them. For exams, they required us to write the answers
and then stand up and explain to the teacher whatwewrote and whywe
answered the way we did. The teachers had the right to ask additional
questions.
I heard that Ukraine became independent In 1991. But, I did not
completely understand what it meant. So, I continued to live without
fully understanding how much that moment had impacted my life.
When we discussed Independence during one of my college courses,
I learned the full impact of what the people accomplished that day,
simply wanting to make a difference. In one of my history classes at
The University, I volunteered to write an essay and present it in front
302

UNIVERSITY
of the class about the vital subject “Independence Day.”
“There are two different perspectives on what Independence means
in our country.
Some people believe that Independence is good
because it helps us advance as other independent countries have
advanced. Others believe that Independence is not offering the same
opportunities as communism did.
With communism, the government provided housing and jobs to
anyone graduating from college. Every person had something, but
the problem with communism was that the people were not truly free.
The government had a path for them to follow.
People were also close-minded and did not see what was happening
outside their own country. Because of Independence, I can travel
wherever I want. Independence has opened doors to the “outside”
world. There is not one individual in charge of the country but the
people. People control the government and have the freedom to do
what they want.
Because of Independence, I can build my own life the way I want it
and not as someone wants it for me. Because of Independence, I know
that there are better things in life to live for me than staying at home
and not progressing because someone has already made my decisions
for me. Because of Independence, no one is there to tell me what to do
anymore.
It is up to me to decide because I am free.”
My words inspired everyone in the room, and even the teacher was
inspired enough to give me an A.
I did well with my studies, but I didn’t have money to pay teachers
for private lessons or anything else. So, I had to do everything by my
efforts. I did everything I could to take advantage of the opportunities
they presented. I made sure I didn’t miss a laboratory assignment
because that accounted for the overall grade. If I made sure I finished
my labs, it meant I passed many of the tests by default. It was the
303

VITALY
easiest way to succeed, but I didn’t do it alone.
Even though I graduated in 1998, I often returned to the vocational
school. I used the Internet at my Computer Science teacher’s class
and visited some of my old teachers and the principal. I liked keeping
in touch with Nina Victorivna, the librarian, more than any teacher.
She was a short lady and probably not seen by everyone, but she was
all-knowingand very kind. She often helped me find what I needed for
my studies or invited me to her house for dinner. While other students
rented books under strict regulations, I was lucky and got to borrow
books I needed for studies and return them based on the trust that we
built with each other. Without her help, I don’t know if I would have
been as successful at school.
So many of my old instructors helped me with questions about my
studies, and I could never forget the medic nurse and how she helped
me with the documents I needed for my summer internship at the
resort. I was so grateful for all the help they gave me as I continued to
work hard toward my dreams, and I wanted them to be proud of me.
Tyotya Valya was right about The University costing money, not for
the education itself, but to bribe officials into passing your tests. It
wasn’t that I didn’t get good grades on my tests. On the contrary, I
worked hard to do well, but they rewarded some people better than
others, giving answers to pass the tests to students who paid for
private lessons.
The Quantum Mechanics class was the most challenging of all
courses. To remember all those long-winded calculus formulas was
almost impossible, and only a couple of students could master it. One
of those A students always impressed me with how they could derive
formulas and apply them on board in front of the entire class while
everyone watched him, trying to understand what he had written. I
was one of those students making detailed notes, hoping they might
help me with the exam preparations.
304

UNIVERSITY
One critical exam I remember began at nine a.m. I needed to be up
early because the physics and math classes were not at The University.
They were across town, and it took me about two hours to get there.
I remember being so worried about waking up early I didn’t even
sleep that night. I was also concerned about two of the girls in the
class and whether or not they would pass. They helped me a lot by
taking detailed notes of any lessons I missed to help me prepare for my
upcoming tests. I was grateful for their help. I helped them in return
by solving complicated calculus and physics-related problems. We
worked together and were looking after each other. So, I was worried
about them.
I spent a lot of time preparing, but I always worried when taking
a test. When I started the class, the teacher wanted me to schedule
private lessons, to prepare for the tests. The instructor would tell the
students the test questions and their answers in the private lessons.
I didn’t have the one hundred hryven—almost all of my monthly
government stipend—he wanted me to pay. So, for me, I knew he
would make up questions I couldn’t answer because I didn’t give him
the money he wanted.
I think that I answered the questions I knew very well. However,
there were additional unexpected questions. I didn’t study for those
questions and could not answer them accurately. As I left the exam,
the teacher said to me, “I wanted to give you a B. However, because
you didn’t know the answer to the last question, I will give you C.”
I felt sad and happy at the same time. I didn’t have anythingless than
a B in any other class during that semester, and I didn’t think giving
good grades for bribing our teachers was the right way to educate
students. I passed with a C, but the girl before me, who knew less than
I knew, got a B. I asked her how she did it, and she explained that she
took his private lessons to help prepare for the exam. She didn’t know
I faced additional questions he taught her in their sessions.
305

VITALY
I was still happy to get a passing grade, but I never forgot the
experience. I did try to be positive. Still, I never felt good about getting
a C, especially knowing I was more capable than some other students.
Some of those students had to retake the exam instead of having a
summer vacation. I was grateful for not being one of them and for
knowing, I always strived to get the best grades possible. The feeling
that I had passed the class honestly, and received that grade with my
efforts, left me proud of my work and accomplishments.
I often felt I only passed my exams because God was helping me
through them. He gave me teachers from the vocational school to
help me, and he gave me the heart to study, but I wanted the world to
be different. I wanted to live where teachers didn’t manipulate their
students and where students didn’t bribe their teachers. I wanted to
live somewhere where honesty was more important than greed.
306

41
Searching for Jesus
Susana, Tanya, Arthur, me, and Zoya with two American missionaries
behind us.
T
HOUGH I SOMETIMES WENT TO CHURCH with Tanya and
her family, I still met with the Jehovah’s Witnesses and
stayed loyal to Orthodox teachings. I wanted to understand
life after death and what eternal punishment meant. I did not know at
307

VITALY
the time that the answer would come when two good-looking young
men with badges on their chests knocked on my door.
I was running late for school and didn’t have time to talk to anyone.
So, I didn’t answer until the third knock. As I opened the door, I
was surprised to find the well-dressed men standing side by side and
smiling at me, almost as if they knew I would be glad to see them. I
recognized one of them from Babushka Zoya’s house. If it weren’t for
seeing him there, I would not have known how they knew me.
I was excited to see them. They weren’t like anyone I knew in
Ukraine. They wore neat black suits and white-collar dress shirts
with ties. I thought they must have a lot more money than I did
or anyone I knew to dress so well at their age. Still, the things that
made them obvious foreigners were their neatly cut hairstyles and
beautiful white smiles. People from Ukraine seldom had such white
teeth because personal hygiene was not the same. Most of the people
I knew took baths once a week and didn’t brush their teeth every day.
They established habits living during communist times when paying
attention to personal needs over the Party was not expected. When
you share a bathroom with other families down the hall, you don’t
always have the luxuries people in other countries take for granted.
“Hello, My name is Elder Bradley, and this is Elder Wilson. We are
missionaries from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.”
The taller one spoke confidently while the other stood back. I couldn’t
help but admire his accent, knowing that he must be learning to speak
my language so he could visit me. Most of the visitors I met from
Canada and the United States spoke Russian, but these two young men
caught my attention when they introduced themselves in my native
tongue.
I remembered hearing the same young man speak English to Arthur.
Arthur was fluent in English and understood everything they said.
Although Tanya was also learning English, she encouraged Arthur’s
308

SEARCHING FOR JESUS
development and allowed him to speak English with them whenever
she could. She always told me that even though she didn’t know the
language well, the Holy Ghost and her heart helped her understand
what they said.
Like Arthur, I wanted to practice and perfect my English. I was
learning the rules of English in school, and I thought maybe they
would teach me too. Also, I knew they must be Americans because of
their American accent and their names. So I wanted to learn about
America. I wanted to know everything I could about them, but I did
not know what to say.
I didn’t need to. Elder Bradley continued, “We are here to speak to
you about the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Do you have a few minutes where
we can talk to you?”
I wished I could stay. They were so intriguing to me. I was curious
about what Elder meant, but I knew I had to go. “I am so sorry,” I said.
“I am excited to meet you and talk to you, but I must go to take a test.”
“Would it be okay if we came back some other time to talk to you?”
I was so happy they were willing to return. So, we set a time for them
to visit.
I thought about them on my way to school and every day after. I
spent every moment I could planning for our visit, but my classes
stood in the way once again. I had a class that ran late on the day our
scheduled appointment arrived. I was heartbroken. At that time, I still
lived with my brothers in the very last building at the city’s edge, on
the road to Romania. To get to and from school took me two hours
each way by Marshrutka. I worried the whole way home, thinking
of how I had missed my second chance to talk to them. I hoped they
would not be too upset and believe that I was ready to listen to what
they had to say.
As I came to my front door, I saw a little note saying, “We returned,
but no one was at home. We’re sorry we missed you. We will return
309

VITALY
next Thursday at the same time.”
I was so happy when I saw the note that said they would come back.
So, I made sure that I was ready for them the following Thursday. I
had everything in the apartment set an hour before they promised to
arrive, just in case, and I did everything I could to help them feel at
home. First, I cleaned. After that, remembering that Tanya’s family
always fed the young men when they visited, I made tea and perogies
to eat if they were hungry. Then, I sat waiting, counting the minutes
until they arrived.
Finally, there was a knock on my door. I rushed to answer it. When I
saw them standing there, I was so impressed by them. They wore the
suits as before with perfectly placed badges on the lapels. “The Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints” was written in bold lettering,
right below their names, “Elder Bradley” and “Elder Wilson.”
I was nervous but very excited to meet them, “Hi. My name is Vitaly.
You said your names are Bradley and Wilson? Are those American
names?”
Elder Bradley smiled, “Yes, but they are not our first names, Vitaly.
When we do our work, we don’t use our first names. We only use
our first names with the people in our community back home. Then,
when we visit new people on our mission, we use a professional title,
followed by our last names.”
His answer was so honest. “So, the name Elder is like a greeting? We
also use different words for the people we know here, like my Tyotya
Valya. I always called her Tyotya Valya because she took care of me as
an aunt would. I only use that name because she is close to me, not
because she is my real aunt.”
“Well, it’s kind of like that, but not exactly. Elder is more like a
professional title. It means someone who is appointed to do the work
of The Church.”
“Oh, I see. It’s like the Orthodox Church when we call someone a
310

SEARCHING FOR JESUS
Bishop.”
“Yes. We have Bishops in our church too. Is that your church Vitaly?
The Orthodox Church?”
I looked at Elder Wilson. He hadn’t said anything yet. I think he was
shy to speak. Elder Bradley did most of the talking, but that was okay.
I thought they would both have things to say as we came to know each
other.
“I’m not a practicing member. I grew up in Communism, in an
orphanage, but when I went into foster care, my foster mother taught
me about the Orthodox Religion and baptized me in the church. So, it
is what I practice. Please come in. I will get chairs from the kitchen.”
We lived in the tiny two-room apartment we received when we left
Tyotya Valya. Our separation was a joyous moment since we no longer
had anyone telling us what to do. We were free to do what we wanted,
but we didn’t get a perfect place to stay. Tyotya Valya always won her
prizes, but we won our freedom at least.
When we moved in, we decided to share one bedroom, putting beds
against each of the three walls to leave the second room as a living
room. We also had a small kitchen and a bathroom that Slavik, Serhji,
and I shared between the three of us. Unfortunately, the bedroom was
so small, the beds overlapped each other, reminding me of the small
rooms of the orphanage. But it gave us a living room, so we lived with
it.
I wished I had a better place for these polite men, but I did what
I could. We sat on the few chairs I had in the center of what should
have been a bedroom for our first discussion about God and the eternal
family.
Elder Bradly was understanding, responding to my apologies with
kindness in his eyes. “It’s not always easy, Vitaly,” he said. “Like with
us. We live our lives in service to The Church. We go out every day to
help people like you find the true meaning of Christ, but we struggle
311

VITALY
too. It is hard to find a good place to live or to have time to do all the
things we need to do, but we do it to serve the Lord and His calling.”
I was surprised to see they sometimes struggled like me. Still, we
were all happy and talked about everything we could imagine. They
told me about some of The Church’s doctrines and were willing to
answer all my questions, no matter how many I had and how hard
they were.
I asked them why they didn’t worship the saints, asking for their
prayers or wearing crosses to remember Jesus’ sacrifice. I wore a silver
cross that an Orthodox priest sanctified for my protection, and I often
wondered why they didn’t have any cross emblems on their scriptures
or in their churches. I believed that the main reason I was wearing
the cross and making a cross sign on my body before entering The
Church and before and after my prayers was to remember Christ’s
sacrifice for us and that I had to remain pure. However, they told me
something that I found very interesting and convincing. “Vitaly, we
believe in Jesus Christ and His sacrifice. We remember Him in our
hearts and don’t place any icons outside on buildings, on scriptures,
or wear them. If wearing the cross on your neck is something that you
like to wear to help you remind you of Him, then you can continue
to do that. There is nothing that prohibits you from continuing to
follow the traditions you’ve learned. We believe that every religion
has something good in it. And whatever is good comes from God,” I
smiled and thanked them for this explanation.
“Why do you fast for only one day? After being baptized, Jesus fasted
for forty days, being tempted by Satan the whole time. As He prevailed
through all those temptations, we fast from eggs, dairy, and meat for
forty days in the Greek Orthodox Church. Why do you starve yourself
from everything and only for one day? ”
“God gave us one day to fast so that we could feed the poor, Vitaly.
So we fast and save the money we would have spent on food to give to
312

SEARCHING FOR JESUS
someone who needs it. It’s another way to be of service.”
I never thought of fasting for that reason. I liked helping people, so
I followed up with another question, “What is a Sacrament? I’ve been
to your Church with Tanya. Why do you call it a Sacrament Meeting?”
“Sacrament is a ceremony where members partake of bread and
water in remembrance of Jesus Christ’s sacrifice.
It allows us a
moment to remember the ministry of Jesus and his Atonement as
the Son of God.”
“Why do you use water and not wine? Wasn’t wine on the table at
the last supper?”
“A revelation was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith said that what
we eat or drink when we partake of the sacrament is not important
as long as we do it with an eye single to His glory. The revelation
also advised that we should not purchase our enemies’ wine or strong
drink. We choose to honor Jesus through both of these teachings. We
take the sacrament as a symbol of his sacrifice, and we do not consume
alcohol to keep pure the intention in our hearts.”
They taught me about the Word of Wisdom I first learned from
Tanya, explaining that it is a healthy way of living given to them
through their prophet Joseph Smith. Next, they explained the Book for
Mormon and told me about the teachings of Joseph Smith. It all made
sense, but what surprised me most was learning that The Church is
still led by a modern-day prophet, along with his chosen apostles and
seventy disciples.
They also taught me that the prophet of the LDS Church emphasized
the importance of tithing ten percent of our income to The Church.
This subject did not fit in my head, but they showed me that this law
goes way back to the Old Testament. Elder Bradley said, “God gives
us all we have, and therefore it is fair to give a tenth back to Him.
Therefore, I have agreed to give my share.”
I asked many questions, and they answered every one with a smile. I
313

VITALY
was happy so many of their answers made sense to me. I searched for
a long time to understand God and why things happened the way they
did. The Greek Orthodox Church didn’t always explain everything,
and the Jehovah’s Witnesses didn’t listen. They just waited to argue
with everything I said. Now, the missionaries were talking to me about
the things I believed. They committed to living their lives in the best
way they could. It sounded like the way I wanted to live.
As we finished our discussion, Elder Bradley pulled a book from his
backpack and said, “Vitaly, we have something for you.”
I wasn’t sure what was happening. It wasn’t my birthday or any
holiday I knew. Elder Bradley barely knew me, and he was giving me a
gift. I was very grateful and excited to see what it was.
Gold lettering shone against a blue background on the book he
handed me. I caressed the letters as I read, “The Book of Mormon -
Another Testament of Jesus Christ.” Looking at the book’s title written
so beautifully in my native language, I realized why some people in the
community called them Mormons. I was surprised by such an elegant
gift and so full of appreciation.
Elder Bradley smiled as he watched me. “We know you love to read
and study the Bible,” he said, “and you know it so well. This book is a
supplement to the Bible. A verse from the Gospel of John twenty-one
verse twenty-five taught us the need for additions like these. This
book is a record of those teachings. We want you to have it.”
I was blessed to have these men in my life, and now they gave me
such a wonderful gift. They asked me to read two chapters from the
first book of Nephi and pray about it to receive my testimony about the
scriptures from the Holy Spirit. I committed to reading The Book of
Mormon every day as I had committed to reading the Bible. I wanted
to be worthy of the new friends I had found.
At the end of our discussion, the missionaries asked me to pray
with them. In the Orthodox Church, I memorized prayers for various
314

SEARCHING FOR JESUS
purposes. So I thought he would recite The Lord’s Prayer or maybe
one of the other sacred prayers I had learned from my Babushka, but
Elder Wilson closed his eyes and prayed a prayer I didn’t know instead.
He thanked God for our discussion and asked Him to bless each of us
and my home, ending with the words, “In the name of Jesus Christ,
Amen!”
I was sad when it was time for them to leave, but they scheduled an
appointment to return. So I knew I would speak to them again soon.
After they went, I knelt and thanked God in my own words for those
two incredible men.
Over the next several weeks, I looked forward to their visits. They
were friends with my friend Tanya, so I knew they were my friends
too. The three of us shared conversations about The Church, but it
wasn’t all about The Church. They shared their family pictures with
me and talked about what they did before their missions. We talked
for hours about their lives or the things they did for fun.
I did everything I could to get to know Elder Bradley and Elder Wilson
better. I loved being around them. Elder Bradley had bright eyes and
spoke Ukrainian. It was easy to talk to him, making him feel like a
good friend, but I loved seeing Elder Wilson most. He was handsome,
with bright white teeth and shining blue eyes. He was a little shy, but
I knew he would open up over time and want to be my friend.
The missionaries were so supportive and generous that I spent more
and more time with them and Tanya’s family. As I did, I started to
feel like maybe they were my family, giving me the love and support I
always wanted. It was interesting that when I finally decided I could
do things on my own, I met such amazing people. I was grateful and
realized that God had once again given me all I needed to support my
journey through my new life, just like He had with my education. I now
understood that my commitment above all things must be to Him.
315

42
The Evils of Alcohol
Preparing for my birthday party at Uncle Lonya’s. I prepared the beautiful
three-layer cake
for everyone to enjoy.
I
N 1993 A GROUP OF MEDICAL PEOPLE traveled from America to
the Chernivtsi X-ray Ecological Department to assist children
with complex diseases. Roman Plachinta studied at the Medical
316

THE EVILS OF ALCOHOL
Academy and got closer to the family of these children. Their kind
and supportive relationships with the people around them impressed
Roman.
As he asked them about their generosity, they shared their tes-
timonies for The LDS Church and gave him a copy of the Book of
Mormon. Over the years, they continued to keep a relationship with
him through letters.
In 1996, Roman was one of the Medical Academy’s best students
and went for an internship in Salt Lake City, Utah. While in Salt Lake,
Roman lived with a family who were members of The Church. Living
with them, he understood that only high ideals and moral principles
could make people so kind-hearted. The ideology inspired him, so
he decided to be baptized and return to Chernivtsi to establish The
Church in our city.
After spending ten months establishing The Church, the first
missionaries came to Chernivtsi in 1997. They rented a room in the
Kvarts Plant for the first Church Meetings. At the time, it was one
of the biggest electronics manufacturers in the USSR. Every Sunday,
the members would gather for three hours of spiritual services, one
hour for the sacrament, an hour for women’s Relief Society and men’s
Priesthood meetings, and the last hour for Principles of the Gospel, a
study of the scriptures.
The official registration of The Church with the local government
happened on September 11, 1997. The LDS Church divides itself into
three levels; wards, branches, and stakes. As The Church was still
small in Chernivtsi, it didn’t have all the levels of larger congregations,
boasting only one branch. Roman became the first president of the
Chernivtsi branch of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.
During his two years of presiding over the Chernivtsi branch, The
Church grew to sixty-three members.
After a few months, they
changed the place for Sunday meetings to Grebinki street, where
317

VITALY
they had multiple white rooms with one big room where all members
could sit for testimonials, prayers, singing hymns, and taking the
sacrament.
The thing I remembered most when first walking into the meeting
room was a thing they called a whiteboard. It had colored markers,
and you could write with markers and then erase what you wrote. It
was the first time I saw anything like it. The brilliant ideas and success
this Church must have to afford such a fantastic tool inspired me.
With each room I entered, my inspiration grew. The white rooms
had desks, chairs, a bookcase withreligious books, a piano, and images
of Jesus Christ everywhere. If it were not for those images and the
words spoken there, one would think they meant to use the room for
corporate coaching meetings.
I began going to meetings towards the end of my first year at
University. It was strange at first. Women covered their heads before
entering the Orthodox Church, and men took off their hats. Also,
people wouldn’t talk to each other. So I was surprised to see the
warmth and love of strangers sharing hugs and updates of what was
happening in their lives and not worrying about what was on their
heads.
The meeting began with President Roman’s notes. Then, we sang
hymns and prayed before the sacrament. One of the young men
offering sacrament, a deacon in The Church, recited words that
weighed heavy on my heart. “O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in
the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the
souls of all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance
of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal
Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son,
and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he
has given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them.
Amen.”
318

THE EVILS OF ALCOHOL
The young man made a mistake while reading the prayer from
his sheet. So he had to reread the prayer four times until he got it
right. I felt terrible that he had to keep trying in front of the entire
congregation when he made such a small mistake. So I asked Tanya to
explain why. She said, “Those words were given to us by the Prophet,
and no mistake can be made when they are spoken. They are sacred
words, a blessing for the sacrament and our souls.”
The sacrament wasn’t much different than my experiences in the
Orthodox Church. We had water from paper cups instead of wine, but
I was glad we used cups. When the Priest at the Orthodox Church
dipped the bread into the wine, he gave it to us on a spoon. I always
wondered how many before me ate from that spoon, but I didn’t say
anything. I knew it was a sacred ritual. Everything about it spoke to
how consecrated it was, but as I listened to the words spoken time and
again by the deacon, I did so with a heavy heart.
When it came to the LDS Sacrament, I didn’t partake. Some people
felt only church members should be allowed the sacrament ritual,
but that’s not why I didn’t participate. The missionaries told me,
“Vitaly, if your heart is pure and you want to remember the atonement,
you can participate in the sacrament. Still, it is important to find
yourself worthy. If you do not keep your commitments, you should
not participate. However, if you have been pure and are ready to renew
your commitment, the sacrament is a time to do that.”
I knew I was not worthy of the sacrament. I had impure thoughts
during the week when I went to the internet club to do homework.
I could have closed the pop-up windows that interrupted my work
offering pornography, but I didn’t. After repenting and accepting
Jesus Christ as my savior, I knew I should not have watched sexually
explicit content. I betrayed my commitment to the prophets, God, and
Jesus Christ. Now, I worried they would not want me as a member. I
couldn’t make any more mistakes.
319

VITALY
After sacrament, President Roman shared a teaching from Elder M.
Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles called “Oh, That
Cunning Plan of the Evil One.”
He said, “The battle over man’s God-given agency continues today.
Satan and his minions have their lures all around us, hoping that
we will falter and take his flies so he can reel us in with counterfeit
means. He uses addiction to steal away agency. According to the
dictionary, addiction of any kind means to surrender to something,
thus relinquishing agency and becoming dependent on some life-
destroying substance or behavior.
“Researchers tell us there is a mechanism in our brain called the
pleasure center. When activated by certain drugs or behaviors, it
overpowers the part of our brain that governs our willpower,judgment,
logic, and morality. This leads the addict to abandon what he or she
knows is right. And when that happens, the hook is set, and Lucifer
takes control.
“Satan knows how to exploit and ensnare us with artificial sub-
stances and behaviors of temporary pleasure. I have observed the
impact when one struggles to win back control, to become free
from destructive abuse and addiction, and to regain self-esteem and
independence.”
Roman helped many people come to Christ and, as a medical student,
who was at the top of the class soon to be a doctor, he also knew how
to help people struggling with addiction or mental problems.
I went home and asked the Lord for forgiveness and remittance of
my sins. He gave me the wisdom to be strong. I’m glad God gave us
the Holy Sacrament and taught us to be pure and repent of our sins. I
had been drinking since I was seventeen years old. My whole family
drank and my friends. Most people in Ukraine drank, but they could
not know the right thing to do if they had not ‘regained self-esteem
and independence.’ Independence was freedom. I knew I would never
320

THE EVILS OF ALCOHOL
be free if I were not also free of sin.
As I deepened my religious practices, it dawned on me that maybe
drinking was the sin that caused Tyotya Valya’s greed and my birth
family to abandon me. I forgave them, and I forgave myself for the
ignorance I once had. I committed to stop everything. I quit drinking,
and I worked to purify myself of the evil thoughts I had about men. I
wanted to have a successful and happy life, and sin did not give me
real happiness. Tanya, Arthur, and Zoya were delighted. I wanted to
live in joy like theirs, and I wanted to share it with the world.
One night, I prayed and read chapter two of The New Testament
Ephesians, verse twenty. It said, “the true Church is built upon the
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone.” I felt good reading the words I heard them using at
The Church, and I thought to myself, ‘If Jesus did call the prophets in
the past and establish The Church, then The Church should be called
by His name–Jesus Christ.’ That truly opened my eyes. After that, I
did not have any other reason not to believe that the LDS Church was
The Church of Jesus Christ with His modern Prophets and Apostles.
The following Sunday, I returned to Church with a new commitment.
I was ready to be a member.
321

43
Disappointment
In one of the classes, I’m sitting with two of my favorite and the only
girlfriends,
who I loved spending time with after University studies. They are the ones
who invited me to dinners and to visit their families.
I
KEPT IN CONTACT WITH MANY Of my friends from the
orphanage. Slavik and I often went back to play volleyball and
322

DISAPPOINTMENT
other sports. It was nice to spend time with them and learn how
their lives had turned out. I saw Igor there too. He had a girlfriend
with him and told me that he had joined some evangelical church. He
planned to go to another city with her to spread the gospel. I was
happy that he didn’t turn out like some of the other people we knew
from the orphanage, ending up in jail for one reason or another. I
was also glad to see he had a girlfriend. Remembering the time we
spent together gave me hope that I could live my life like him. I could
be happy with a girl like he was. I could get married one day, and we
could have children together. Seeing him made me believe.
I didn’t have much time to visit our old friends between school and
work, but Slavik kept in touch with everyone he could, and I was glad
he did. The children from the orphanage were my family, the only
family I knew before living with Tyotya Valya and Dyadya Grisha. So
when I watched my friends Nadija and Rostik walk out the door after
being adopted, it wasn’t to say goodbye forever, even though it felt
like it at the time.
Chernivtsi was not a big city, and many people who grew up in our
orphanage stayed in touch, remaining friends for life. One year, as
Eastertime approached, I decided to spend the sacred holiday visiting
Nadija and Rostik in their village. I remembered how wonderful the
family who adopted them was, and I couldn’t wait to see everyone
together.
It had been months since I spent time with anyone but the members
of my church. I loved spending time with Tanya, Arthur, and Zoya,
who I now called my Babushka, my grandmother, but I also missed my
traditions. So, I decided to spend the Easter weekend with the family
in the village and connect with my Orthodox roots.
We had a short break from school for the holiday, which was good.
I was ready for some relaxation. So I woke up that morning at 4:30
to catch the train. People lined up waiting for the bus, some waiting
323

VITALY
for an hour or two before the bus finally arrived. As many people
traveled to see family for the Easter Holiday, the buses were cramped
and slow getting to their destinations. It was a long day traveling, but
eventually, we all got to where we wanted to go.
I was surprised by the village when I arrived. Years of occupation
and war left most of the small cities in Ukraine without the resources
they needed to keep their towns clean. As a result, the air often stunk
of garbage and cow manure. There were no paved streets, and the
people in small villages weren’t very welcoming. They were poor and
unhappy from generations of pain and financial burdens, and they
didn’t care to know new people.
This village was different. It was clean. There was asphalt on
the main road and a water pump for anyone to use. Having clean,
accessible water was very unusual for a village. I imagined the people
there must have money. Everyone was very welcoming to me like I
had come home from a long journey and the scenery was as beautiful
as it could be. The day was sunny, and the streets were clear of debris,
surrounded only by the landscapes where the farmers grew wheat and
sunflowers. Everything about the town was so different from the city I
called home. This place was more than I imagined any home could be.
I took a long deep breath of pure, fresh air, and I committed. This was
the life I wanted and would work toward, the one where everything
was clean and happy.
“Vitaly!” It was Nadija. “Vitaly! You’re here!”
I turned to see both Nadija and Rostik as they approached me. They
looked happy like the village. “Nadija, Rostik, it’s so amazing to see
you. This is where you live? I could never imagine living in a place like
this.”
“Wait until you see what we have planned,” Rostik said, “We’re
going to have such a wonderful time together, celebrating every
moment. Come with us. Some of the friends in the village want to
324

DISAPPOINTMENT
meet you.”
I was so happy to be with my friends again, living the life I always
wanted. The Timoshenko family that adopted Nadija and Rostik from
my orphanage treated them like their own children. They were so
generous to have seven foster children in addition to the four children
they had of their own, and they treated them all alike. Everyone loved
each other, and they were happy. Even their adopted children called
their foster mother Mamma instead of Tyotya Olena, as I had to do
with Tyotya Valya. I couldn’t wait to spend Easter here. Maybe this
would be the kind of family I would like to have one day.
Everyone welcomed me with arms open wide when we returned
to the house. Their mother, Olena, was so kind and treated me as
well as she would treat her children. Every moment was a celebration.
There was a lake nearby, and although the water was cold, Rostik, his
brother, and I went swimming. Then, they took me around, showing
me many of their holiday traditions. We spent the afternoon walking
from one house to another, eating plates full of traditional foods and
having drinks with friends. We even went to see them slaughter a pig
in preparation for a feast. I loved to eat pork, but I never saw it happen
before. Luckily, they stabbed in the neck to make quick, but I knew I
wouldn’t want ever to have to do that myself.
Spending time with them made me realize how difficult it was to
live with Tyotya Valya all those years. I never felt this love. Even being
there for so long, I never felt what I saw in them as their Mamma Olena
accepted them as family. I noticed how there are two kinds of people
in the world, those who are generous and love everyone and those who
are greedy and will leave children to survive alone. They were so close,
and I was jealous of them. I couldn’t help it.
I decided to try and forget the life I had and enjoyed the many
traditions of the village they were showing me. We went to a church
liturgy that started at midnight. The church was full of people, and
325

VITALY
even more of them stood outside. We joined the service inside. As we
walked, each person lit a candle for the remission of our sins and sang
Christian songs that praised Jesus’s resurrection and glorified God
with the words, “Jesus has Risen! Indeed, He has Risen!”.
After the Resurrection Mass on Easter morning, people brought
baskets with food to be blessed. We carried Easter bread called Paska
wrapped in cloth. We also had pysanky—Ukrainian Easter egg, ham,
and sausages, and some brought cheese and butter, pork fat, salt,
horseradish, and seeds. After the ceremony, the family would enjoy
their blessed food as an Easter breakfast.
Being in an Orthodox Church service reminded me of my childhood.
There were icons everywhere, and there was no sitting. So, we all
stood listening to the priest speaking in the Slavic language. The
whole experience reminded me of my Babushka. She always wanted to
make me a priest, but I knew I was not worthy to stand before people
and guide them to God, not yet. I could only hope to change and make
her proud one day.
In the evening, Masha, my sister, and Luda, the sister of another
orphan I knew from Fastivska Street, joined our adventure. We all
went to visit other families in the village. I was so happy to see Masha.
As I was busy with school and my new family from the church, I hadn’t
had much chance to see her. So I was looking forward to spending a
whole weekend together, building our family bonds.
We visited a close friend of Luda’s, where everyone dressed in
traditional Ukrainian clothes. They were singing and celebrating at
a large fire made out of vehicle tires. Everyone there was drinking
vodka, which didn’t surprise me.
Most people in Ukraine drank
vodka. Drinking was as much a part of communism as shared homes.
Employers gave alcohol as gifts to workers by the caseload. So, I was
used to people drinking, but when Masha and Luda started drinking
too, I was very disappointed.
326

DISAPPOINTMENT
When I joined the church, I learned how harmful drinking is. So I
committed to God that I would not drink, but I was also responsible
for looking after my brothers and sisters. I did not want alcoholism to
harm her or anyone else in my life. I felt my heart breaking inside and
wanted to be an example of how we could celebrate without drinking.
So I told her, “Everyone here is drinking a lot of alcohol. You don’t
need to drink so much.”
She brushed me off, saying, “Vitaly, it’s a celebration. Everyone is
drinking, but you. It’s okay for us to have a little fun, isn’t it?”
Masha had always been a little wild like my mother, but she was
Tyotya Valya’s favorite. Tyotya Valya loved Masha more than anything.
We all thought she was the best. Now, watching her, I realized that she
became someone different after we left Tyotya Valya’s house. She was
drinking and smoking too. I always trusted her to be a good person,
doing good things. I thought she’d be okay, but she wasn’t. She was
so different than I imagined she would be. I was not happy watching
her. “Masha, I thought it would be different for you. You don’t want
to be like our parents, do you?”
She turned on me, “You don’t know what it’s like, Vitaly. You’ve
been so busy with your friends. You haven’t been around to see. We’re
not like you. I just want to enjoy myself. It’s not that bad. You know, I
could have ended up like Nadya, but I’m not. I’m just having a little
something to drink.”
I was shocked by her words, “Wait! What happened to Nadya?”
“Nadya had a baby,” she said. “She isn’t living a healthy life, Vitaly.
She was smoking and drinking the whole time she was pregnant, and
she was doing drugs and having sex with men she barely knew. All the
things she was doing affected the baby. He was only two and a half
kilograms and forty-three centimeters when he was born, and he has
some physical problems.
“I wouldn’t do that! I want you to know that. I wouldn’t do what
327

VITALY
she did. I’m just having a drink.” She went quiet for a moment like
maybe she didn’t want to continue. Perhaps she was sorry she began
the whole story.
“What is it, Masha? Tell me.” Nadya was my sister, and I loved her.
I wanted to know what was happening to her.
Masha took a deep breath, “First of all, she didn’t want to. I want
you to know that, but she didn’t know what to do. She didn’t have
the money to take care of him.” She was quiet for a moment, but I
waited. “She took the baby to the Maternity Hospital, Vitaly. He’s in
an incubator right now, but he’ll end up in an orphanage like we did.
Nadya can’t take care of him.”
I didn’t say anything. I couldn’t. I was too angry to speak, so I just
got up and walked away from the fire. Nadya abandoned her child,
just like my mother left me, and now Masha was going down the same
road. She didn’t think she was, but she would do the same thing her
family had done to her. It was like a vicious circle, everyone doing the
things they swore they would never do.
I didn’t know what to do. Like me, Nadya’s child was beginning its
life in the hospital, having health problems. His mom was not taking
care of herself. She didn’t listen to good people who told her not to
smoke or drink. What would happen to the child now, I wondered?
Here we were orphans, growing up in a world with no parents. Not
long ago, someone abandoned her, and now, here she was, joining a
whole new generation of people leaving their children behind. Here
was my sister acting just like my mother.
I was glad I made a choice not to drink. I was happy I had found
the church, and I knew God was there to help me be strong against
alcohol’s temptation. I didn’t like that everyone else was drinking,
but I decided to let it be for now. I was furious, but I was also worried
about Nadya. I wanted to see her and talk to her. Maybe there was
something I could do. As long as the night continued to be a good
328

DISAPPOINTMENT
night, I could speak to Masha and Nadya later.
As I returned to the fire, they were already on to another conversa-
tion, as if nothing had happened. “…whatdid you do?”
It was Masha. She was talking to Luda.
“My brother prevented the fight and ended the issue. He saved me
from being beaten up again.”
“Why didn’t you leave before, Luda? If he was beating you, why
didn’t you leave him?”
“I tried. I separated, and I wanted to get a divorce. He beat me up all
the time, but I couldn’t do anything if there were no witnesses. Andrij
said, ‘Witnesses do not live long, Luda.’ So, I was worried. If anyone
said anything about what he did or how he beat me, I thought they
might be hurt.”
I looked across the room to where Andrij was laughing with some
friends. Luda said her brother had saved her, but she was still there,
at the party, with her husband.
I sat listening to her story, listening to all their many stories, and I
realized this was not the place I wanted to be. I always thought they
were different. I never thought Masha would do bad things. I never
thought Mamma Olena would let Luda live this way. I thought they
were the family I wanted. Easter was supposed to be a holy time, not a
drinking time, not a fighting time.
Everyone in the church said they believed in God and the Easter
Celebration, but I didn’t see their faith in their actions. Everyone was
still awake at four a.m., drinking and yelling, and not even thinking of
the life of Christ. I thought it would be different here. I had dreamed
of being with a family like this, but it seemed everyone here drank too
much. Maybe I would be drinking too if it weren’t for the church.
When I decided I wanted to become a member, I quit drinking. I
wanted to have a different life than my mother and the other people I
watched ruin their lives with alcohol. Seeing people who loved God,
329

VITALY
saying God loved them, and that they had devoted their lives to Him
but still loved to drink was not honest to me. From what I had learned
at the LDS Church, I didn’t think they were righteous or that they truly
loved God. The church inspired for me a connection between God and
no drinking.
This place wasn’t a place where the saints were. When I arrived,
I saw a pure village with kind people in it, but in the end, I saw this
village was as unclean as any other, washing away their lives with
vodka and not loving each other or genuinely being there for each
other. I was so happy to see everyone again, but it didn’t stay in my
head as the right place to spend my time.
The wisdom of our Ukrainian traditions comes through sayings.
There was a saying I always remembered. “Whom you spend time
with, so much you will learn from and become.” I loved spending time
with my family, and for much of the weekend, I enjoyed it, but they
were also people who were drinking and doing bad things. It didn’t
make sense to me. I wanted something more.
Tanya once told me, “If someone sees you with a can of root beer,
you are not following the Word of Wisdom. Instead, you present
the opportunity and temptation for them to do the same. You are
encouraging them to think of beer because you are drinkingsomething
that looks like beer.”
Tanya was such a good person. I wanted to be a better person,
like her. I thought this family was perfect. I was so happy that they
adopted so many children. Their mother welcomed me like I was her
child. They were better than any family I knew, and now, they were
nothing more than what my mother had become. But, again, I was
disappointed as I did not find the family I hoped I could find. Only the
church members were living the life I wanted to live.
More than ever, after so many teachings by the church members
about how families can be happy on earth and live together for eternity,
330

DISAPPOINTMENT
I wanted to earn my opportunity to visit the Temple and leave evil
behind to find a better life.
331

44
Broken Families
Me, my brother, his father Alec, and Alec’s son—my brother’s brother
from left to right.
M
AKING IT ON OUR OWN WASN’T ALWAYS EASY.The state
continued to give us about one hundred hryven a month
as long as we went to school. It was the same as they
gave Tyotya Valya for each of us. Between that and the fifty hryven we
332

BROKEN FAMILIES
made at the restaurant, I found a way to pay for utilities, clothes, and
food. I often worked for food credits, getting money only for my tips.
Still, sometimes if we catered a banquet, there were tips to share, and
I could buy fresh vegetables and fruits to preserve for winter.
I also received help from my Uncle Lonya sometimes. When we lived
on our own, Uncle Lonya had a little garden at his house, and Aunt
Lena would invite me over occasionally to help her tend it. We would
plant vegetables and strawberries or pull weeds, the way I learned
at the orphanage. Sometimes we gathered cherries and strawberries
or vegetables that she would let me take home with me. She also
taught me how to make preserves for the winter. We would spend
hours together, cooking and canningthe fresh fruits and vegetables we
found, or we would make pickles and crush cherries and strawberries
into juice. We spent all the time we could during the summer to
preserve enough food to last everyone through the winter. We worked
hard, but I was happy. I found a way to take care of myself and never
asked Tyotya Valya for another thing. I did everything I could to earn
money and be a welcome visitor at Uncle Lonya’s home for dinners
and holiday celebrations. They were the only family I had left.
Besides getting money from my uncle, I excelled in math and physics
and was ahead of many other students at my school. So, along with
avoiding tests, I was also able to tutor others who needed my help. In
exchange for that help, my friends often invited me to their homes
for the weekend. The village where they lived was not that far from
the University, so I returned often and made great friends. I would eat
and spend time with their family, and it was enjoyable. It also saved
me from having to spend money on food.
I also helped Tanya’s missionary friends with cooking and cleaning.
They were helping me as well. Living with Tyotya Valya, I helped scrub
the whole house every week. She always wanted detailed cleaning. We
cleaned the windows, the window sills, floors, doors, bathroom, toilet,
333

VITALY
and carpets. So, I became good at cleaning. As I spent more time with
the missionaries, I found they needed someone to help them around
their rooms. I would clean their apartment for two hours a week to
receive ten American dollars.
Cleaning for the missionaries was easy compared to what I did on
Subotnik, and I loved getting American money. Every time I received
American money, I saved it, only taking it to the bank when it was
time to exchange it. When I was small, an American dollar was worth
two and a half hryven. By the time I lived with Tyotya Valya, it was
worth five. As I did work for the missionaries, I could get ten hryven
for a single American dollar. So when I saw American dollars, I knew
they could make money for themselves without any effort on my part.
Money was important to me. But it wasn’t just about the money.
It was the lifestyle I saw of families who had money. Money meant
happy families who loved each other—never feeling hungry or cold. It
meant I could travel and spend more time with the church members.
The missionaries there introduced me to many amazing stories of
what is possible when people aren’t greedy or mean. Being poor is
what makes people greedy. Though sometimes, some have little who
want to help others. I couldn’t wait to get enough money to help other
children like me.
I also wanted to travel outside of Ukraine and see new ways to enjoy
life. The American missionaries shared many amazing stories about
being where anything is possible. They told me about opportunities
in America, and I knew I wanted to go there one day.
Along with helping the missionaries and Uncle Lonya, I also did
work for Roustam’s father, Alec. They needed someone to help them
with renovations at their apartment. It was a tough job. Every day
for two months, I spent three to four hours painting, repairing, and
cleaning. I offered to do it for free. I would have done anything to
build my relationship with my brother back then, but Alec’s girlfriend,
334

BROKEN FAMILIES
Masha, wanted to pay me, and I needed the money. So, I agreed. I had
to do a lot of work, and it was hard, but I loved learning new skills by
doing the renovations.
Besides the money, staying connected to Alec strengthened my
relationship with Roustam. I did what I could to keep in touch with my
brother. Even when I was not doing work, I would call Alec every week
to see if he had any news for me. Not long after testifying that Roustam
would take care of me, I turned eighteen, and my brother moved to
America. I hadn’t seen him for a long time, but I still wanted to be
close to him. He was the only brother I had. I thought of Slavik and
Serhij as my brothers because we lived our lives and grew up together,
but Roustam was the only other person I spent time with that had the
same blood as me pumping through his veins.
Alec’s girlfriend, Masha, was the one who invited me over the most.
She was so sweet and treated me very much like her own son. She
loved to feed me and talk to me about the renovations. She also did
beauty care on the side, cutting my hair when I needed it. She worked
very hard, but Alec was lazy. He worked in real estate, but he was not
very good at it. He was not good at anything.
Nevertheless, they found ways to get by, primarily by her effort. She
did everything she could to ensure we all had what we needed. I always
trusted Masha to be a wonderful person.
“Can you come by later? Roustam sent a surprise for you.” I was so
surprised by Alec’s comment that I couldn’t breathe at first. I was just
finishing for the day and didn’t know I would be getting a surprise
from Roustam.
Still, I was afraid the chance would go away if I did not answer soon,
so I blurted out the only promise I could make. “Of course, I can come
back. I would love to have a chance to talk to my brother.”
I asked uncle Alec every week if there was newsfrom Roustam. There
was never much to report. Roustam didn’t reach out to me anymore.
335

VITALY
He was happy in America with his wife and didn’t seem to have room
for me in his life.
Masha smiled. I could see she was happy to see me so happy, “Okay,
be back by nine p.m. That’s when he will call. And I will make you a
nice dinner to fill your belly too.”
I could hardly wait to return and see what Roustam had planned
for me. This conversation would be our first since he left. I had been
waiting for news for a whole year and hadn’t heard anything at all
from him. Now, here it was. He would be calling me, and he sent a gift
as well. I was elated.
I rushed through my afternoon responsibilities and arrived back at
Alec’s home before nine p.m. Of course, I was a little early, but I didn’t
want to miss my chance to hear Roustam’s voice again.
As it turned out, there was no reason for me to rush except to enjoy
Masha’s excellent food. We waited more than three hours before
Roustam’s call finally came.
“Hey, little bro. How are you doing?”
My heart smiled when I heard his voice, “I’m doing great. I’m still
living with Slavik and Serhij, going to school. Sometimes it’s hard to
pay the bills, but I work hard and find ways to earn money.”
I had so much more to say, but Roustam didn’t wait for me to finish
before jumping in, “Yeah. Things are hard for everyone. I don’t know
if you know, but my wife is a nurse. She works day and night, two
shifts. I’m going to school, so she’s the one who is working right
now.” He didn’t say it, but I knew what his words meant. ‘Don’t tell
me of your troubles,’ he was saying. ‘My life in America is hard. Feel
sorry for me. Don’t ask me for anything.’
“You know we have to feed the kids, and they have school too,” he
continued. “We live with Ludmila’s parents in Los Angeles right now.
We’ll move out when I find a job, but until I’m out of school, things
will be hard for us.”
336

BROKEN FAMILIES
I wondered how much money he needed living with Ludmila’s
parents, but I didn’t ask. I decided it was best to keep him happy,
talking about his life. I also had curiosity, so I just decided to ask
questions. “What are you studying? I know you finished technical
school as an architect and construction engineer before leaving. Are
you taking classes about construction?”
“No,” he said. “Sometimes it is better to go easier ways. I wanted
to continue construction studies, but it was better for me in America
to study economics. I hope to go back to my specialty one day, but I
will stay in business and become an accountant for now. I will get a
Business Degree. So, when do you graduate, Vitaly?”
“I still have a year or two of school, but I’m doing very well. I get
the highest grades, and I also help others to improve their grades.”
Roustam shared my excitement for school, and I wanted him to be
proud of me, so I boasted about my successes. I wanted him to see
I am unique and want to have a relationship with me. Sometimes, I
felt he was jealous that I was doing life on my own, but I think he was
happy about it, too, because I wouldn’t need anyone’s help.
I answered his questions about school, but I wanted to continue on
the most crucial topic. Alec was Jewish, and he told me how the Jewish
people in Russia or Ukraine sometimes took their families to America.
It starts with one of the family members moving to America and living
there for a while. Then, after they have established themselves, they
can bring the entire family. So, I thought that Roustam might help me
go to America, but I didn’t want to just come out and ask him because
I knew I must convince him that it was a good idea first. So, I decided
to take it slow, “Did you receive my letters? I sent mail to you through
Alec, but I didn’t hear back from you. Did you read them?”
“I did. I did. I wanted to write back. I’m so happy to hear from you,
but things have been so busy and sending letters back to Ukraine is
expensive. The surprise I sent you cost me seventy-five American
337

VITALY
dollars and another hundred fifty for shipping. I sent you the gift for
your birthday and to let you know I love you and am there for you,
little brother.”
He mentioned the expense like I didn’t know how much even the
smallest stamp cost, but I knew. I used the little money I had trying
to stay connected to him, sending him letters with some pictures and
greeting cards, as well.
“Great!” I wasn’t as enthusiastic as I sounded. This conversation
wasn’t going the way I hoped it would go, but I decided to see how
he would react to my wish. “Maybe someday, we could live closer
together, Roustam. I am very excited to come to America. I know
there are other people there who like to bring their families to live
close to them.”
“Well, we’ll see,” he said. “As I mentioned, I’m living with my wife
and her parents. So I don’t have time to take care of a little brother.
But I sent you a gift, Vitaly. I wanted you to know I love you, so I sent
you a gift. Your uncle Alec has it.”
I was quiet. I didn’t know what to say. I thought I could live in
America with him because he was my brother. I was hoping he would
help me after I graduate. I even wished we could be a family one day,
like the Yakivna’s. They were together, supporting each other. I hoped
maybe, one day, we could be a family like them.
Roustam grabbed hold of the silence before I could respond. “Listen,
little bro. We’ve been talking for thirty minutes, and phone calls are
costly here. So, I need to go, but I’ll talk to you soon. Uncle Alec has a
surprise for you.”
“Okay…” I didn’t get a chance to say, ‘Thank you.’ The phone
disconnected before I could speak any words.
Alec stepped forward the moment I laid down the phone. “Well,
Vitaly. Here you go!”
He approached me like he was giving me an invitation to dine with
338

BROKEN FAMILIES
royalty, but all he handed me was a box of American candy and a ten-
dollar bill. Then, he walked away. So, after everything, after all the
money Roustam took for the apartment, the deal he made with Tyotya
Valya, and the money I knew he was making in America, all he sent
me was ten dollars. I didn’t know if Roustam was lying or if Uncle Alec
had decided to keep some of the gifts for himself, but I was pretty sure
the box of chocolates I held in my hand didn’t cost him seventy-five
American dollars, and I was probably to the point where I didn’t care.
Masha approached me when Alec was out of the room, “I’m so sorry,
Vitaly. I thought he would give you more than that. Alec said he gave
eight hundred American dollars to the Born Again Christian Church
last week. I was sure he would give that or more to his brother.”
It was hard for me to understand why Roustam would give that
much money to a church, but only ten dollars to his brother, but I
knew Masha would always tell the truth. Right then, I knew the money
Roustam gave me was not because he loved me. He just did what
everyone else I knew growing up did. He took what he needed, not
thinking of who it hurt. But then, he gave back as little as he could to
make it seem even.
Everyone in Ukraine was poor, too poor to help others. So, they
didn’t know how to be generous. I left the house knowing things had
changed. I worked so hard to try and stay connected, but Roustam
wasn’t there for me. He hadn’t acted like my brother in a long time,
but maybe I didn’t need him to be my big brother anymore. Maybe, I
found something better. I found a whole family, and we weren’t going
to take what we needed to leave nothing for others. We would help
others find happiness too. We would show them the true church and
how to create happy families for eternity.
I knew I couldn’t count on Roustam anymore, but I was grateful
anyway. I didn’t need him. I was the one now who would do what
he couldn’t. I wasn’t an orphan anymore, needing someone to save
339

VITALY
me. I wanted to be like the people in Germany, who sent us gifts for
Christmas. I wouldn’t be the one who took. I wanted to be the one who
had enough to give. I would be there for the people who needed me.
Ten dollars wasn’t a lot, but I knew it could get me one step closer to
my dreams. I would add the money to what I was saving to visit the
Temple in Frankfurt. From there, I would serve God, and He would
give me what I needed to serve the world.
340

45
Choices
In my tiny apartment where Serhij, Slavik, and I lived after we left Tyotya
Valya.
I made a nice dinner for everyone and invited friends to come.
I
WAS STILL THINKING A LITTLE about Roustam after leaving
uncle Alec. I was sad, but mostly I was grateful. Even though
the person who was supposed to be my brother was not there
341

VITALY
to help me, I still had my brothers waiting at home, and I knew they
were there for me. My friends at the church were there for me as well.
I was not alone.
I had been praying for weeks to find a way to get to the Mormon
Temple in Frankfurt, Germany. The Mormon Church was not like most
churches in Ukraine. All the churches I had visited were called holy
temples, and anyone could enter. But the Mormon Temple was not
like their churches. It was secretive and memorable, and no one could
enter unless they were baptized and following their commitments. To
go, I had to be more than just a member. I had to be worthy.
Other church members were preparing with me, and we were all
excited to feel the blessings of the church, but I think I was more
inspired to go than anyone. I listened to the testimonies of church
members who had visited there. I knew, if I could go to the Temple
one day, I might be exalted in the Heavenly Kingdom of God. I needed
this trip to purify my sins.
I was poor and barely had enough food, but I knew I needed to save to
go to the Temple. With the money from Roustam and the money I had
saved from the social worker after buying a new coat, I now had sixteen
dollars. Imagine that. I was so happy. I had sixteen American dollars.
It felt like God was there for me and was answering my prayers.
As the days passed, I decided to distance myself from my brother.
Instead of calling Alec to check on Roustam, I spent as much time as
I could around the people who inspired me. I loved spending time
with Tanya and her family, and I especially loved being with the
missionaries. But more than anyone, my favorite person to be with
was always Slavik. We had so many adventures together.
One day we were up hours before the sun to catch the train and
go to the Kalynivskiy Rynok Market. Tyotya Valya used to go to the
market with her son and daughter-in-law. They bought containers
of imported clothes from Germany to sell. It was the most prominent
342

CHOICES
street fair in Ukraine, maybe in all of eastern Europe. It was so big. It
had its own police force, bank, and bus station. Vendors came from all
over the world to sell goods there, people from Italy, Germany, Spain,
and many other nations. You could buy anything you wanted or could
even imagine.
The market was open all year long, and we knew if we needed
something, we could find it there. So, one day, we took one of the
Marshrutka across Chernivtsi to three kilometers north of the city
center, where the market was located. Because we first had to travel
an hour on the bus to the city center, it took the better part of a day,
but we needed to go once in a while, so we took the trip. For some
things, this was the only place you could find them.
Today, I needed pants, and Slavik was going along with me as an
adventure, and maybe he would decide to get something too after I
found what I needed. So we searched a sea of vendors for what we
needed. Each was eager to convince us to buy what they were selling. I
had earned twenty-two hryven working a long banquet. At that time,
it was equal to less than five American dollars, but I found a nice pair
of pants for twelve hryven, and Slavik found shoes he needed for one
of the modeling classes he took.
I was always excited to get new clothes with no holes or places too
thin to keep the cold air out. Now I had new pants, but we still had a
lot of looking around to do. So we traveled through the shop looking
for what else we could buy.
Just as wewereready to leave the market, I realized my pantsweren’t
where I thought I had put them. “Slavik. My pants. They are gone.”
I was devastated. I didn’t know what had happened. “I think I must
have set them somewhere. I think I lost them.”
Slavik said, “Don’t worry about it, Vitaly. We will just go and get
you another pair.”
“But the pants were twelve hryven. I only have ten left. I can’t get
343

VITALY
another pair of pants.”
“Do you know what, Vitaly? You are my best and oldest friend. Here
are two hryven so you can get another pair of pants.”
When we left with my new pants, I was so excited. Whenever I got
money, I spent it on more than just myself. I would always buy ice
cream and take it to Slavik and Serhij to share. I always thought of
others, and I was so grateful when Slavik did nice things for me, but
his gift was better than anything else I could imagine this time.
Slavik was always showing kindness to others by helping them in
any way he could. I often came home from school to find Slavik with
new friends helping them somehow. One time, he invited two friends,
Roman and Vassily, and allowed them to stay with us. I didn’t mind. I
was always happy to help people who needed it, and I was glad to have
a brother like Slavik, who also liked to do kind things. Still, my mind
changed a little about helping them only a few days later.
I returned home one evening from discussions withthe missionaries.
I felt very positive, inspired, and close to God, like he was there with
me. However, as I walked into the apartment, I saw it was a mess, and
it was warm as well, after being a hot day.
We lived on the eighth floor of a concrete building. They heated the
entire building with a water heater located in the basement. It was
cold for us in the winter because the hot water often didn’t make it
to our floor. Sadly, we suffered the opposite extremity every summer
due to the concrete walls and being so high off the ground.
When I first arrived, I wasn’t too worried because I saw Slavik was
cleaning up the mess, “What happened?” I asked.
“Roman,” he said quietly.
I wasn’t surprised, and I wasn’t worried at first. Roman often left
a mess, and I knew I could do something about the heat. Every time
the missionaries left an apartment or moved somewhere, they would
leave behind valuable items. I often took the things they didn’t want.
344

CHOICES
Not long before Roman came, one of my missionary friends had given
me an air conditioner he no longer needed, along with a voice audio
recorder.
I felt the gifts were exceptional because Elder Wilson told me they
bought the recorder as an early birthday present. They didn’t want
to just give me leftovers for my birthday, and they didn’t have a lot
of money, so the missionaries gathered money to provide me with
something they knew I would love.
Thanks to their gifts, it seemed everything would be fine again until
I found the air conditioner wasn’t where I left it, and neither was the
voice recorder. I looked for several minutes before returning to the
living room, where I found Slavik was still cleaning. Finally, I asked
him, “What happened to my air conditioner and my media player? I
looked everywhere, but they are gone.”
Slavik sighed, “My friend Roman said someone wrote a complaint
about him to the police, saying he beat them up and stole one hundred
and twenty dollars. He thinks you wrote the complaint, Vitaly. He is
furious. He made this mess in the house and took the media player
and air conditioner, saying he wouldn’t give them back until you made
it right.”
“I didn’t make a complaint to anyone,” I said. “I want my stuff
back.” Now, I was angry.
“I told him you wouldn’t do that, but he wonders who it is if it’s not
you and not me.”
“Why would he think I said those things? I don’t take anything
from anyone!” I was so upset. I couldn’t understand why he took the
items given to me by the missionaries. Those items were special to
me because they were gifts.
“Well, the guy who talked to the police said his name is Vitaly. So,
Roman asked me, ‘Who was it if it wasn’t your friend, Vitaly?’ I told
him I didn’t know, but I knew you wouldn’t be the one to do something
345

VITALY
like that. I don’t know. Maybe they made it up, so they could steal your
stuff. He’s the one that made a mess of the house. He said he would
return your things to you, but we need to meet together tomorrow to
go to the police.”
After helping Slavik clean a little, I walked out of the room. I felt
punished for doing something nice and helping Slavik’s friends and
didn’t want to be angry for being helpful. I knew I could do anything
with the help of the Lord. So, I kneeled by my bed and prayed for
God to give me the wisdom to handle the situation. I prayed for
understanding, and I also prayed for Slavik. I felt terrible for him
to be in this mess with me. I counted him as my closest brother, but
sometimes he hung around the wrong people. I prayed to God that
He would protect Slavik and help him through his life. I gave Slavik
everything I had and could provide at that time, but now I wondered if
he needed more than just my help.
I knew what it was like to live the way Roman lived. I remembered
being younger. I was always looking for ways for people to help
me. When I was very young, I asked, but everyone said, “No,” so
I discovered that the easiest way to get what I needed would be not by
asking people but by borrowing from my teachers.
One day, when I was at the orphanage, while everyone was changing
to go to class, I hid in the wardrobe of the changing room. We had the
same routine every day, so I knew my teacher’s bag was on the table
by the door. I also knew, when everyone finished getting ready, the
teacher would lead them out and lock the door. Once it became quiet,
I came out and went straight to her purse and found ten rubles inside
her wallet. I took it. I was shaking the whole time, even as I ran from
the room.
I couldn’t lock the door after me, so it remained open and available
for anyone else to see. I didn’t care. I went to hide in a classroom
located in a different building, away from the scene of my crime.
346

CHOICES
I sat panting, feeling breathless. I couldn’t believe what I had done.
I remember there being some change left in the bottom of the bag, but
other than that, the money I took was all she had. Ten rubles was a
lot of money at that time. I didn’t know what to do with that kind of
money, and I began to panic. I couldn’t take it, so I decided to tear the
cash into pieces and throw it away.
When I returned to class, I saw my teacher’s purse again, sitting on
the desk. The teacher knew I was the only one missing from class. So,
she called me to the front of the room and asked me, “Where were
you?”
“I was in the changing room, hiding.”
She asked me, “Did you take the money from my bag?”
“Yes.” I knew she knew I was the one who took the money. There
was no point in denying it.
“Where is it?”
“I was so afraid I tore it into small pieces and threw it away.”
She stared at me for a minute. I couldn’t tell if she believed me, but
it didn’t matter. I knew there was no escape from punishment. “Put
your hands on the desk, Vitaly.”
The room was silent. Everyone knew what happened when we stole.
The teacher grabbed the pointer stick hanging next to the chalkboard
and struck my knuckles several times, saying, “You will learn not to
take things without permission.”
After leaving her class with sore knuckles, I had more punishments,
but they did not teach me not to steal. Instead, I learned that day that
somebody was always watching me and that even if I thought I could
hide my worst actions, in reality, I wouldn’t be able to do that.
Maybe, it also taughtme not to get caught, but I waspoor and hungry,
so I still took things. I stole pastries and bread from the shops when
they left them by the doors to cool. We would hide behind the security
guard and take our treats, running into the bakery to hide, or we would
347

VITALY
wait for pallets to be set on the curb and take our chance before they
could load the food into the delivery trucks.
We took our treasures back to the orphanage and hid them in our
wardrobe to have food when we were hungry. Slavik was always so
generous, sharing his treats with everyone, but I was not as helpful. I
only shared my treasures with my botsya Slavik. He was the only one
in the whole orphanage who ate with me.
The greatest lesson I learned in my life was, to be honest with others
and grateful for anything they gave me. Over time, I also learned to
steal less. I realized I could make more money by collecting bottles
and selling them. There were a lot of empty bottles in Ukraine. I knew
I could find a whole bunch of them all around our school. So, I learned
to work a little gathering bags of bottles to make money instead of
stealing it.
I also learned to make money other ways and accept gifts. Whether
it was benefiting from the missionaries, new pants from Slavik, or a
free meal with Tanya’s family, I learned that some people would help,
but I had to ask for it. I wasn’t afraid of asking for things because I
knew that I would receive almost everything I needed. I just had to
ask the right people.
After Roman took my things, I imagined the pain those people felt
whenI took their items, but I didn’t judge who I was. There were plenty
of reasons for me not to succeed in life. Living in poverty, feeling
disrespect from the outside world, and not having the opportunities
inherent to living in ‘normal society’ all have their effect.
As a
result, many people coming out of the orphanages were drug addicts,
alcoholics, or thieves. Unfortunately, I’ve met many peers from
the orphanage who have been in prison and lost everything through
drinking and crimes.
I felt sorry for them because I knew there were not many good people
willing to help them. Still, some orphans had done well in their lives
348

CHOICES
after graduating from the orphanage school. Forty percent of teens
did end up graduating. Unfortunately, for many, there was nowhere
else to go from there. A few like me were lucky. I had opportunities,
and I was determined to make life successful. I wished that was true
for more orphans, but I was beginning to see that maybe I was the
exception and not the rule.
Slavik seemed to land somewhere in the middle of it all. I wanted
the world to be different. I wanted to live in a place where people
weren’t scamming each other. I wanted to live in an area where love
was more important than greed. But, we all begin as children, greedily
suckling at our mother’s breast if we have one, and eventually, we
must grow and learn to think of others. Orphans need people to guide
them through their lives, just as if they were parents. We all need
parents, in the beginning, to help us understand what having enough
to share means. Slavik seemed to be born to help those people who
didn’t know how to help themselves.
Being Slaviks’ friend taught me that there are people in the world
who do good things and people who do wrong. Of course, this didn’t
make the people good or bad. It just meant there were people you could
trust and people you couldn’t, but I was starting to feel like almost
everyone in Ukraine was the kind I couldn’t trust.
The day after Slavik and I cleaned up the mess in our apartment,
Slavik told me that Roman wanted to meet with me alone, but I didn’t
trust the situation to be safe. So Slavik went with me. We met Roman
in the park, and all went to the police station together to correct the
issue. The police told Roman it was a different Vitaly who had filed
the report against him. He still had the charge against him, but the
police released him, telling him that he must return the items to me
right away.
It all worked out in the end. Roman returned my things, but I still
didn’t trust him. I didn’t like having him around. I felt God had
349

VITALY
protected me and helped Roman see what he needed to do, but I didn’t
know what he would do next.
I felt sorry for Roman and Masha and Nadya and all the orphans
who grew up to suffer because they didn’t have any real-world lessons.
Maybe if people didn’t stereotype them and realized that they are
the ones that need help and guidance, perhaps their lives could have
been different. I wished Roman’s life could have been different, just
as many lives of other abandoned children. I still wonder who he
might have been if he had been given a good life with a good family.
Would he have learned respect, hard work, and not to take things for
granted? I wondered what could happen if all orphans had a chance
to live with loving, supportive families. How different would their
opportunities be if they had an opportunity to look, dress, speak, and
behave differently than society expected?
All of these thoughts left me with a big decision to make. What life
was mine to live? Was it here in Ukraine, surrounded by the small
community of my peers who still suffered their social injustice, or was
it somewhere bigger I needed to be, somewhere where I could make a
difference in the world? Was it maybe with the people who wanted to
make the world better with me?
350

46
Beginnings Start with Endings
At Tyotya Lena and Uncle Lonya’s house. Tyotya Lena and I prepared the
table filled with food for our birthday celebration. We invited friends from
the church to join us.
W
HEN MY TWENTIETH BIRTHDAY CAME, I decided this
was a good time to forget all my worries and enjoy my
family and our love for one another. Today was my day,
351

VITALY
a day where everything could be about me, and I knew we could have
a wonderful celebration, the kind I always dreamed of having when I
was a little boy feeling so alone.
I spent my life never having a day of my own. We didn’t do big
celebrations for birthdays at the orphanage because there were too
many children. Then, when we lived with Tyotya Valya, she never
believed we should make a huge deal for our birthday. So today, I
wanted to make up for all the years and enjoy everyone celebrating my
day the way I always wanted. I invited my whole family to celebrate it
with me.
Tyotya Valya came with Dyadya Grisha. She and Masha helped me
prepare food for my party, and it seemed Tyotya Valya was much
happier when I supplied the food for our dinner. So we all cooked
together and enjoyed having our time as a family. I was so grateful.
I also invited some friends from university, and Slavik also asked a
couple of people. So, Masha, Nadya, Slavik, and Serhij, plus a few
friends, were all there for my birthday celebration. There were around
ten people altogether, so I made a big meal that overflowed, leaving
barely any room on the table for us to eat. After the celebration was
over, Nadya stayed to help me clean, and I gave her food to take home
with her. It felt good that I had enough to share.
After having a party at home with my family, my Uncle Lonya also
hosted a second birthday party for me the next day. I was so grateful
to have Uncle Lonya in my life. He was always so kind to us as we were
growing up. He gave me money when I needed it, and since I no longer
had Roustam in my life, he felt more and more like the father I never
had. So I wanted to be close and build a relationship of trust between
us.
To celebrate my birthday, I made two cakes that I decorated myself.
I felt inspired to use the talents I learned in culinary school and was
proud of my creations. One cake was for my friends and family to
352

BEGINNINGS START WITH ENDINGS
enjoy at my first birthday celebration, and the other I took to my Uncle
Lonya’s the following day. I was so excited to share what I had created
with him.
He made the day special for me. Tyotya Valya always thought that
family should be the only ones to celebrate our birthdays, but when
Uncle Lonya offered to have a party for me, he said, “It’s up to you
who comes to your birthday. We’ll cook what you want. We’ll invite
whoever you want.” So, I invited Tanya, Arthur, the missionaries, and
a few other church friends to celebrate with us.
Aunt Lena helped me prepare food. We had fresh juice, cabbage rolls
with meat and rice, a salad made with boiled veggies and sausage,
black and red caviar, and Ukrainian sausage. We ate beaten meat, fried
pork chops with onions, and torte, candies, with ice cream for dessert.
There was so much food, my belly finally felt as full as my heart. I was
so grateful that everyone came to my party. Having family made me
feel more prosperous than all the presents I received. I did not feel
poor today.
My birthday celebrations left me feeling so blessed for my life and
everything I had. I wanted to share it with everyone. I saw people
being generous and giving to me. Now I could be the generous one. I
could help others as much as they helped me.
Being part of the church also meant helpingin the local communities.
As a curious twist of fate, it turned out that one of the church members,
Vasyl Ivanovych, was also the headmaster of the orphanage where
Slavik and I began our lives. When we moved out of this orphanage
and into foster care, he often checked on us to ensure our family cared
for us. He also gave us the culinary school recommendation.
I spent a lot of time catering and working in bars in addition to the
restaurant where I worked. I also went back to the orphanage with
Vasyl to help when I could. It felt strange donating my services at the
place where I needed someone to take care of me so many years ago,
353

VITALY
but I was so grateful when people would visit or bring donations, as
we often felt as though the world had abandoned us. Now, I was able
to give the same to the children there. I wondered if the children felt
grateful and inspired when they saw me and what I had become. I
hope I motivated them.
I was so happy to have Vasyl there as a mentor and friend in my
church. The Mormon Church was still small in Ukraine. Because we
were small, we often faced the challenge of finding a building where
we could worship. Vasyl was very generous, allowing us to meet at the
orphanage. It didn’t surprise me. We all knew one another, calling
our fellow church members brother and sister. Feeling so close to
everyone there, I knew Brother Vasyl had the same values as me and
the same generous heart.
After one of our Saturday meetings, I decided to see Masha and
Nadya. After seeing Masha, I was concerned about them and wanted
to talk to them. When I gave Nadya the food I had left from my party,
they were so happy. So, when the church moved to be not far from
them, I decided to visit them and take some of the Napoleon cake I
made. It was my favorite cake to make with boiled cream inside, like
an eclair. I loved sharing my creations with them. I knew they were
hungry, so I always tried to bring them something.
I spent the whole day visiting them and talking to them about their
lives, but I knew I needed to do more to help. I always tried to be a
faithful person. I learned a lot from the missionaries, and I wanted
to live my life the way they lived, helping others find the truth of the
gospel. So I often invited Slavik to different church events. After a
few visits, he said our church events were boring, and he didn’t enjoy
them. I couldn’t see how they were more boring than standing the
whole time, listening to a liturgy in a language we didn’t even know,
but he said the only thing he liked there were the sweets after.
Slavik didn’t react to the church the way I hoped he would. I could
354

BEGINNINGS START WITH ENDINGS
see he didn’t feel the same inspiration I felt when I was there, but I still
encouraged him to join me when I could. Maybe one day, he would
find the happiness I had found, and we could join this new church
family together.
I could only hope that Masha and Nadya would see whatSlavik didn’t,
but I knew I needed to take the chance. So, as it was getting later in
the day, I said to them, “I’m tired today. Maybe, I could sleep here
tonight, and we could all go tomorrow for an event we’re having with
my friends tomorrow. There will be a lot of food there, and I think you
will like many of the people.”
Masha was Orthodox, so I didn’t invite her to our sacrament
meetings. As I had done with Slavik, I knew I needed to start slow
and ask her to church activities instead. Happily, they agreed, and so I
stayed the night. I made a delicious dinner for them, and we enjoyed
spending time together as a family.
“How is Dima, Nadya? Did you go to see him this week?”
I thought my question was one a brother should ask his sister, but
Nadya was quiet. I think I knew why, but I just kept looking at her,
waiting for her to answer me.
Masha finally broke the silence, “I went to see him, Vitaly. He was
very small initially, but he’s growing so fast. I know he will grow to be
such a strong and healthy child like you did.”
“Have you not seen him, Nadya?” Masha was trying to make up for
Nadya. I couldn’t pretend I wasn’t upset. I couldn’t believe she would
do this to her child. I spent my whole life waiting for my mother to
come and see me. I felt abandoned, and now, Nadya’s child would
feel the same way. “Nadya, how can you do this to your child,” I said.
“Have you never visited him?”
“You don’t understand, Vitaly. I can’t. I don’t have money to see
him.” Nadya wouldn’t look at me as she spoke.
“It’s true, Vitaly.” I saw Masha wanted to protect Nadya again.
355

VITALY
“Uncle Lonya has been buying medication for Dima, and he comes by
to give us food and money, but it’s not enough to include a visit. It is
challenging. We don’t have much.”
I remember all of the times Uncle Lonya did the same for me. I
was grateful that he was worried for us as if we were his children and
continued to care for us even after Tyotya Valya ended her relationship
with us. Uncle Lonya was the only family we had left at this point.
Tyotya Valya attended my party, but that was the only time I had seen
her after moving out. I knew she would never contact me if it were up
to her. Uncle Lonya, on the other hand, was there for us, and I thanked
God that he existed.
Nadya didn’t say anything else. She just began cleaning from dinner.
She was distraught, and I could tell she had regret for her actions.
Watching her made me think of my mother. I wondered how much
trouble she had trying to come and see me. Perhaps she also had
problems with money and regretted not visiting more.
I spent much of the night sleepless, thinking of my mother. I
remember little of the church event we attended the next day. Even
though I was grateful to have my sisters there, I could only think of
getting home and seeing if I couldn’t find some solace in my prayers.
When I arrived home, my mood got worse. Slavik and Serhij had
friends over, and everyone was drinking when all I wanted was to be
alone.
I walked past the group, closing myself in the bedroom. I spent the
whole night thinking of my mother. Maybe she was struggling like
Nadya. Perhaps that was why she didn’t visit me. What if she needed
my help? If she was still having a difficult time, I could be there for
her.”
I remembered visiting my mother’s small apartment before Rous-
tam sold it. Slavik and I also went to check on her.
I was quiet as Slavik and I approached her door. I stopped a few feet
356

BEGINNINGS START WITH ENDINGS
before Slavik did. I couldn’t go in. I wasn’t ready to face her yet. I just
wanted to know if she needed help. So, I stood to the side of the door
as Slavik knocked.
She answered quickly and cautiously, opening the door just a crack
and not saying any words.
“Hi. Are you Yevgheniya Nikitichna?”
“Yes? Who are you?” She was short with her answer and seemed
suspicious right away. I wondered how anyone could be doubtful of
Slavik, with his cherub cheeks and pure kindness radiating from his
eyes.
“My name is Slavik. I’m a friend of your son. He just wanted me to
check in on you?”
“My son? You’re a liar. You don’t know Roustam. Why would he
care about me?”
“Not Roustam. Vitaly. I’m a friend of Vitaly.”
“Vitaly?” Did she hesitate when she heard my name? I couldn’t tell
without seeing her. I wondered if there was longing in her eyes, but
her answer came too quickly, stopping my thoughts in their tracks. “I
don’t know any Vitaly!” she yelled.
I don’t know what happened next. Tears burst from my eyes before
I could stop them, and I left, running down the street and away from
mothers who forget their children.
I remembered that day, but I also thought of the pain I saw on
Nadya’s face. I wasn’t sure what to do. I couldn’t help but wonder if
the first person I needed to save wasn’t my mother.
A knock at the door startled me back to the moment. It was Serhij,
“Vitaly, you can’t stay in this room forever. You must celebrate with
me.”
I looked at him for a moment. “What are we celebrating tonight?”
My tone was sharp. There was a party in our apartment every night,
and I was tired of celebrations and everyone drinking.
357

VITALY
“I’m going to live with Vera.”
I just looked at him. Serhij was the most progressive of all of us.
People in Ukraine didn’t live together without being married, but
Serhij didn’t care. He was moving out to live with his future wife,
and now we needed to decide what to do with our home. What would
happen to our friendship and our lives? I didn’t know.
The one thing I did know was that everything was about to change.
Serhij would want his share of the apartment, and I wasn’t sure how
we would give it to him without moving. For the first time in my life, I
wasn’t sure where to go or what to do next. I always had a goal, but
I couldn’t imagine any place that would give us what we had here. I
didn’t want to live without Slavik in my life, but I wasn’t sure where
we would go together. There wasn’t a plan I could make for how we
would get through this.
The only sure thing I had in my life that day was the church. Maybe
it was time for me to move out and move on with my life the way I
wanted to live it. But, it was a big step, and I didn’t feel ready. I could
only hope my new church family would be there for me in a way my
birth family never was.
358

Epilogue
Serhij’s wedding with Slavik, Serhij’s wife, Serhij, Masha, and I, but no
Nadya.
I HAD LIVED WITH SLAVIK AND SERHIJ in our apartment for about
two years when Serhij decided to move in with Vera. We could do
nothing to give Serhij his share but to sell our wonderful home.
We scheduled to meet with a woman who was supposed to buy the
apartment. Still, before we finished the paperwork with her, we asked
Uncle Lonya to help us because he knew a lot about business and
understood property sales.
“She’s trying to cheat you.” We all looked at Uncle Lonya as he shuf-
fled through the documents. “There is not adequate documentation
359

VITALY
for selling the apartment properly. If you go forward with this, she
will leave you in the streets.”
It didn’t surprise me. Everyone was trying to take advantage of us.
“Don’t worry, though,” he said. “I’ll help you to sell your apartment
in the right way.”
Uncle Lonya negotiated a new contract, and just a few weeks
later, Slavik, Serhij, and I went with him to the notary to sign the
agreement. Uncle Lonya asked me to count the money as she finalized
the paperwork. For the first time in my life, I held four thousand five
hundred American dollars in my hands. It felt great. I had worked
hard so my brothers and I could have a place to live. This money was
the result of my effort.‘
Uncle Lonya smiled as we all took our turns holding the money.
As the notary left the room to gather the last of our documents, he
spoke to us as a father would. “You boys are growing up, but you
are still young. I am worried that if you take all this money now, you
might drink it all away.” He looked at Serhij with his last comment. I
had to agree with him. Serhij drank a lot, but Uncle Lonya continued
optimistically, “Serhij, you are moving in with Vera. What if I gave
you three hundred dollars of this money so you could get everything
you need for the wedding.”
“Three hundred dollars is not enough,” Serhij said, staring at the
pile of money that now sat in our Uncle Lonya’s hands. “I need five
hundred, at least.”
“If I give you five hundred now, you will regret that amount in the
end,” he said, handing Serhij three hundred dollars.
‘That leaves nearly four thousand dollars,’ I thought, but I didn’t
say it out loud. Instead, I wanted to wait and see what Uncle Lonya
was planning to do with the rest of the money.
“Vitaly, you and Slavik could stay with me for a while until you can
get another place of your own. I need some renovations in one of the
360

EPILOGUE
apartments I own. I could give you two hundred dollars each to help
you with school and other expenses. Then, I will take the rest, and I
will invest it for you. I am working on many projects, like the house
and the salon. I will use the money and pay you back with fifteen
percent interest over the next three years.”
It sounded like a great opportunity to me. The best part was, I would
still get to live with Slavik, and we would have a place to stay where I
wouldn’t need to pay the bills for a while. Slavik agreed it was a good
idea, as well.
In the end, I took only one hundred dollars. I didn’t need more than
that, and I was excited to make interest through the money Uncle
Lonya kept. Slavik decided to take two hundred. That meant we each
had over a thousand dollars invested and earning interest.
We were still with the notary signing the last of the documents
when uncle Lonya shared his plan. “That is quite a special deal your
uncle is offering you,” she said smiling. “Would you like me to create
a document to show your investment and when you plan to make
payments?”
Uncle Lonya jumped in right away, “It is expensive to have all of
those documents. We are family, and our word is enough.”
I was excited by the idea of having a document to show how I was a
man now making investments, and I had seen the way banks were able
to recover their money by having loan agreements when the borrowers
didn’t want to pay. So, I suggested, “Maybe we could create just a note,
Uncle Lonya, and not add all of the other documents.”
“We could make a promissory note,” the notary added.
Uncle Lonya became quiet for a moment, and then he asked, “Why
do you need a document, Vitaly? Do you not trust me to pay you?”
Everyone looked around nervously, including me. I trusted my Uncle
Lonya more than anyone, “No. I was just so excited by my first real
business transaction. This is my first investment. I wanted something
361

VITALY
to show for it.”
The room became thick with silence as I glanced at the money in his
hand.
“What if we just did a simple IOU?” The notary asked, breaking the
awkward emptiness before anyone else even moved.
“Of course, if that would help.” Uncle Lonya’s tone was terse. I
hoped I didn’t offend him too much, but that apartment was the only
thing I had in my life that had any value, and it suddenly seemed that
the money I had earned from it was passing through my grasp too
quickly.
We all signed beneath the short paragraph summarizingthe terms of
our agreement. We then left the notary’s office without even a stamp
or any words from Uncle Lonya. I took my money, along with some
cash Slavik owed me, and I bought dress shoes and sneakers. I lent the
rest to the branch president because he said he needed renovations. It
felt good to be independent enough to invest my money in worthwhile
things. Finally, I was ready to live the life successful people lived.
Serhij’s wedding wasn’t far behind the sale of our apartment. I
was excited about the event. Traditional Ukrainian weddings are big
celebrations with music and dancing that sometimes last weeks and
include the entire community.
In the traditional pagan ritual, the celebration begins with young
unmarried girls donning wreaths and entering the forests to search for
the ‘paporot’ flower. Legend said they would receive good fortune and
a handsome mate if they found the flower. Many Ukrainian girls had
run into the woods over the centuries, more playing than searching,
excited to be part of the traditions they had watched growing up. I
think they were also excited because they knew the unmarried young
men of the village would soon be joining them, as they followed behind
the women, looking for their mate.
Once they found a mate, the young suitor would then emerge from
362

EPILOGUE
the forest wearing the wreath the young maiden wore when she went
in. The villagers would be waiting to celebrate, knowing they desired
to be married, but the game wasn’t over. The potential groom still
needed to ask permission of the parents. So, the young woman’s
friends would hide her in the back room of her home to prevent her
from being stolen by any man. The suitor’s job was to offer her parents
ransom to take her as his bride. The parents would then bring him an
imposter; someone dressed to look like the maiden.
The best part of the tradition was when the suitor demanded they
bring him his true love. The most traditional men made a grand show
of realizing they tried to trick him and claim his bride as the only
woman he could love. The families then responded to his outrage,
saying, “We will bring her, but she is valuable to us. So, we demand
more ransom.”
After negotiating a fair amount, they sent the suitor to gather
his promised money. As everyone in the town was involved in the
courtship, they would contribute what they could, but that still wasn’t
a guarantee. After the suitor gathered the dowry, he returned to the
home, and they would either give him his bride or her parents would
meet him at the door, carrying only a pumpkin.
If the girl’s parents came to the door with a pumpkin, it meant
the family rejected his offer to marry their daughter but offered the
pumpkin instead, as a gift, so he would not leave with his hands empty.
All of this happened days before the wedding. So it was an exciting
celebration of tradition for the entire community, but Serhij liked to
be progressive and didn’t follow the conventions. He proposed to Vera
without ever stepping foot into the trees and lived with her before
they were married. He also skipped the ransom he would pay to Vera’s
parents, probably because he didn’t want to give up any of his money.
I wished he had followed some of these traditions. With everything
Chernivtsi had been through, our ceremonies were important. There
363

VITALY
were times when they were the only thing we had.
Luckily, there were some traditions even Serhij could not avoid, as
wedding ceremonies were all the same. On the wedding day, Vera’s
parents offered a ritual blessing for the couple called ‘Blahoslovennia.’
To begin the blessing, the ‘starosta’ or elder from the church turned
to Vera’s parents, saying, “Please, sit on the bench.” He then placed a
long embroidered cloth called a rushnyk on their lap.
The starosta continued withwords that werecenturies old, “As these
two children stand before their own mother, before their own father,
before their uncles, before their godparents; maybe they did not listen
to one of you, I ask you to forgive them and bless them.”
The family members responded with equally ancient words, “Bih
sviatyi,” meaning, “May Holy God forgive and bless you.”
After reciting the blessing three times, Serhij and Vera bowed and
kissed their parents’ faces. They then kissed their hands and feet, as
well. Finally, they repeated the kissing three times to forgive any sins
and thank their parents for blessing the wedding.
Traditionally, they would have had the ceremony at the bride and
the groom’s houses, but Serhij was an orphan. So, they would not
have a chance to do the ritual a second time, but I don’t believe they
cared. What happened after the blessing was my favorite part.
The moment after they gave the final kiss, Serhij and Vera ran
laughing, forgetting the sadness of only one ceremony. They raced,
trying to beat each other to a rushnyk of their own, as whoever’s foot
landed on the rushnyk first would be the one to have the final say
throughout the rest of their marriage.
As the ceremony ended, the elder covered Vera’s hair with a tradi-
tional crown, showing she was now a married woman. He then donned
Serhij with a hat to represent his responsibilities as a man. Then, we
all traveled together to the city clerk’s office to witness the city official
registering them as a married couple.
364

EPILOGUE
Everything was official now. So we all left the office to stand on the
street and watch Vera’s parents open a bottle of champagne, giving
glasses to Serhij and Vera. They drank together, and then, as they
both swallowed the last of their champagne, they ceremoniously
threw their glasses to the ground, shattering them to bring luck and
happiness to their union. And with that, the ceremonies were over.
Serhij and Vera were married, and now it was time to party.
The wedding party gave everyone a loaf of wedding bread to begin
the celebration. I was pleased about this because I loved wedding
bread. I couldn’t wait to enjoy it and all the food and drinks we would
have after finishing the ceremony.
I was even more excited to celebrate with my friends. I had been so
busy with school and the church I hadn’t had many opportunities to
spend time with them, but I knew I would now. We would be awake
all night and maybe even the next day, singing and dancing and, even
better, having delicious food and drinks.
We were all very happy for Serhij and caught up in the ceremony, so
I didn’t realize Masha was there alone until I saw her standing near
the food, and Nadya was not with her.
“Where is Nadya?” I asked as I approached her.
Masha responded, speaking to the floor and not to me, “Serhij didn’t
invite her.”
“What? Didn’t invite her?” Serhij had invited over one hundred
and twenty people to his wedding. Everyone I knew was there, except
Nadya. “How could he not invite his own sister?”
“She didn’t have any money,” Masha’s face was still facing the floor.
She knew how I would feel.
Of course, one of the traditions Serhij still wanted to honor was
asking each guest to bring no less than twenty dollars to his wedding.
Of course, twenty dollars was a lot of money to many of us, but it was
traditional to give a gift, and we honored his request. Still, I couldn’t
365

VITALY
understand his decision to leave his sister out of his wedding just
because she didn’t have money.
I often thought Serhij was as greedy as Tyotya Valya, and today he
proved it was true. His only concern on his wedding day seemed to
be making a profit. “I guess I know now how we will pay for this
wedding,” I said with my blood boiling.
Masha sighed.
“What now?!” I knew Masha. She had something more to say, and
she didn’t want to say it.
“Uncle Lonya gave him the money for the wedding.” She looked
away, nearly weeping.
I felt terrible for Masha to watch Nadya go through all her suffering
and try to be strong, but I couldn’t stop to comfort her. I was so upset.
Uncle Lonya wasstill upset withme, not speakingto me since the day
I asked for a promissory note, except to give me chores to do around
his house. He hadn’t paid me any money back from the loan yet, but
here he was, acting as a father to Serhij and paying for his wedding.
I felt like I was back living with Tyotya Valya’s judgment, where she
would punish me for requesting things that were mine.
I loved my life, and I loved the people in it. I loved my mother and
brother, even if they didn’t know how to love me in return. I loved my
foster brothers and sisters and my many friends and teachers from
the orphanage and other schools along the way. I even loved Tyotya
Valya and my Dyadya Grisha for taking me into their home and giving
me the best life they knew how.
Looking at all the people I considered family in my life, I remem-
bered how they helped me. Though I felt alone and even scared at
times, there was always someone to raise my hope again. As hard as
it was, I loved my life and my native country, not to be judged but to
remember what I learned there. Everything I needed came to me, and
I gave credit to God.
366

EPILOGUE
I often felt I only passed my exams because of God’s help.
I
succeeded through His guidance and with the help of teachers and
friends. I created a life free from jail cells and the worst atrocities of
poverty because God was there for me, leading the way. God gave me
strength.
He guided me through my life, leading me to Tanya, her family, and
eventually, the missionaries. We laughed together and supported each
other, reading scriptures and always trying to be good people. They
were as much a family to me as anyone growing up with me, and I
knew I was ready to make my commitment to them to be my eternal
family.
I left the wedding thinking of Nadya and how Serhij had abandoned
her, the same way she abandoned her child and my mother abandoned
me. No one could look beyond their pain to see the pain they were
causing others.
I had a good life, better than most orphans. Maybe I wasn’t the one
who needed anyone else to fill the empty spaces in my heart. Maybe my
heart was whole all along, and I was the one who could help others find
their way. Nadya was lost and needed help, just as much as her baby.
I think my mom needed that too, and she probably never received
it. Maybe she didn’t have someone like Martha in her life or Slavik.
Perhaps life had tossed her to the side, and no one ever found a way
for her to be useful. I knew I could be there to give Nadya food when
she needed it, but what did my mom need that she never received?
It was time for me to reconcile the one thing I had never reconciled.
I needed to be there for the one person who had probably needed my
love and support far more than I needed hers. It was time for me to
move out of my Uncle Lonya’s house and in with my mother.
367


About the Author
VITALY MAGIDOV earned an MBA degree from the University of Utah, 
a BS in Computer Science from Utah Valley University, and a BS in 
Electronics Engineering from Chernivtsi National University. Serving 
as a Missionary in England, he learned to inspire and assist those in 
need. His life ambition is to return to Ukraine and offer innovative 
opportunities for the children now growing up in the same orphanages 
where he began his journey.
You can connect with me on:
https://vitalybook.com
https://twitter.com/vitalybook
https://facebook.com/readvitalybook https://
www.instagram.com/vitalybook 
https://www.youtube.com/vitalyonline
369
ABOUT THE AUTHOR


